Contents
Title Page
Dedication
Epigraph
Foreword
Part I
Chapter 1
Chapter 2
Chapter 3
Chapter 4
Chapter 5
Chapter 6
Chapter 7
Chapter 8Chapter 9
Part II
Chapter 10
Chapter 11
Chapter 12
Chapter 13
Chapter 14
Chapter 15
About the Author
Also by Toni Morrison
Also by Toni Morrison
Acclaim for Toni Morrison’s
CopyrightDaddyThe fathers may soar
And the children may know their namesForeword
I have long despised artists’ chatter about muses—“voices”
that speak to them and enable a vision, the source of which
they could not otherwise name. I thought of muses as
inventions to protect one’s insight, to avoid questions like
“Where do your ideas come from?” Or to escape inquiry
into the fuzzy area between autobiography and fiction. I
regarded the “mystery” of creativity as a shield erected by
artists to avoid articulating, analyzing, or even knowing the
details of their creative process—for fear it would fade
away.
Writing
 Song of Solomon
 destroyed all that. I had no
access to what I planned to write about until my father died.
In the unmanageable sadness that followed, there was
none of the sibling wrangling, guilt or missed opportunities,
or fights for this or that memento. Each of his four children
was convinced that he loved her or him best. He had
sacrificed greatly for one, risking his house and his job; he
took another to baseball games over whole summers
where they lay in the grass listening to a portable radio,
talking, evaluating the players on the field. In the company
of one, his firstborn, he always beamed and preferred her
cooking over everyone else’s, including his wife’s. He
carried a letter from me in his coat pocket for years andyears, and drove through blinding snow-storms to help me.
Most important, he talked to each of us in language cut to
our different understandings. He had a flattering view of me
as someone interesting, capable, witty, smart, high-
spirited. I did not share that view of myself, and wondered
why he held it. But it was the death of that girl—the one who
lived in his head—that I mourned when he died. Even more
than I mourned him, I suffered the loss of the person he
thought I was. I think it was because I felt closer to him than
to myself that, after his death, I deliberately sought his
advice for writing the novel that continued to elude me.
“What are the men you have known really like?”
He answered.
Whatever it is called—muse, insight, inspiration, “the
dark finger that guides,” “bright angel”—it exists and, in
many forms, I have trusted it ever since.
The challenge of
 Song of Solomon
 was to manage what
was for me a radical shift in imagination from a female
locus to a male one. To get out of the house, to de-
domesticate the landscape that had so far been the site of
my work. To travel. To fly. In such an overtly, stereotypically
male narrative, I thought that straightforward chronology
would be more suitable than the kind of play with sequence
and time I had employed in my previous novels. A journey,
then, with the accomplishment of flight, the triumphant end
of a trip through earth, to its surface, on into water, andfinally into air. All very saga-like. Old-school heroic, but with
other meanings. Opening the novel with the suicidal leap of
the insurance agent, ending it with the protagonist’s
confrontational soar into danger, was meant to enclose the
mystical but problematic one taken by the Solomon of the
title.
I have written, elsewhere and at some length, details of
how certain sentences get written and the work I hope they
do. Let me extrapolate an example here.
“The North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance agent
promised to fly from Mercy to the other side of Lake
Superior at 3:00.”
This declarative sentence is designed to mock a
journalistic style. With a minor alteration it could be the
opening of an item in a small town newspaper. It has the
tone of an everyday event of minimal local interest, yet I
wanted it to contain important signs and crucial information.
The name of the insurance company is that of a well-known
black-owned company dependent on black clients, and in
its corporate name are “life” and “mutual.” The sentence
starts with “North Carolina” and closes with “Lake
Superior”—geographical locations that suggest a journey
from south to north—a direction common for black
immigration and in the literature about it, but which is
reversed here since the protagonist has to go south to
mature. Two other words of significance are “fly” and“mercy.” Both terms are central to the narrative: flight as
escape or confrontation; mercy the unspoken wish of the
novel’s population. Some grant it; some despise it; one
makes it the sole cry of her extemporaneous sermon upon
the death of her granddaughter. Mercy touches, turns, and
returns to Guitar at the end of the book, and moves him to
make it his own final gift to his former friend. Mercy is what
one wishes for Hagar; what is unavailable to and unsought
by Macon Dead, senior; what his wife learns to demand
from him, and what the townsfolk believe can never come
from the white world, as is signified by the inversion of the
name of the hospital from Mercy to “No-Mercy.” But the
sentence turns, as all sentences do, on its verb. “Promise.”
The insurance agent does not declare, announce, or
threaten his act; he promises, as though a contract is being
executed between himself and others. He hopes his flight,
like that of the character in the title, toward asylum
(Canada, or freedom, or the company of the welcoming
dead), or home, is interpreted as a radical gesture
demanding change, an alternative way, a cessation of
things as they are. He does not want it understood as a
simple desperate act, the end of a fruitless life, a life
without examination, but as a deep commitment to his
people. And in their response to his decision there is a
tenderness, some contrition, and mounting respect (“They
didn’t know he had it in him”), an awareness that his suicide
enclosed, rather than repudiated them. The note he leaves
asks for forgiveness. It is tacked on his door as a modest
invitation to who-ever might pass by.Of the flights in the novel, Solomon’s is the most magical,
the most theatrical, and, for Milkman, the most satisfying.
Unlike most mythical flights, which clearly imply triumph, in
the attempt if not the success, Solomon’s escape, the
insurance man’s jump, and Milkman’s leap are ambiguous,
disturbing. Solomon’s escape from slavery is also the
abandonment of his family; the insurance man leaves a
message saying his suicide is a gesture of love, but guilt
and despair also inform his decision. Milkman believes he
is risking his life in return for Pilate’s, yet he knows his
enemy has disarmed himself. These flights, these erstwhile
heroics, are viewed rather differently by the women left
behind. Both the quotation and the song of the title fairly
shout that different understanding. To praise a woman
whose attention was focused solely on family and domestic
responsibilities, Milkman summons a conundrum: that
without ever leaving the ground she could fly. My father
laughed.Part IChapter 1
The North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance agent promised
to fly from Mercy to the other side of Lake Superior at three
o’clock. Two days before the event was to take place he
tacked a note on the door of his little yellow house:
At 3:00 p.m. on Wednesday the 18th of February,
1931, I will take off from Mercy and fly away on my own
wings. Please forgive me. I loved you all.
(signed) Robert Smith,
Ins. agent
Mr. Smith didn’t draw as big a crowd as Lindbergh had
four years earlier—not more than forty or fifty people
showed up—because it was already eleven o’clock in the
morning, on the very Wednesday he had chosen for his
flight, before anybody read the note. At that time of day,
during the middle of the week, word-of-mouth news just
lumbered along. Children were in school; men were at
work; and most of the women were fastening their corsets
and getting ready to go see what tails or entrails the
butcher might be giving away. Only the unemployed, the
self-employed, and the very young were available—deliberately available because they’d heard about it, or
accidentally available because they happened to be
walking at that exact moment in the shore end of Not
Doctor Street, a name the post office did not recognize.
Town maps registered the street as Mains Avenue, but the
only colored doctor in the city had lived and died on that
street, and when he moved there in 1896 his patients took
to calling the street, which none of them lived in or near,
Doctor Street. Later, when other Negroes moved there, and
when the postal service became a popular means of
transferring messages among them, envelopes from
Louisiana, Virginia, Alabama, and Georgia began to arrive
addressed to people at house numbers on Doctor Street.
The post office workers returned these envelopes or
passed them on to the Dead Letter Office. Then in 1918,
when colored men were being drafted, a few gave their
address at the recruitment office as Doctor Street. In that
way, the name acquired a quasi-official status. But not for
long. Some of the city legislators, whose concern for
appropriate names and the maintenance of the city’s
landmarks was the principal part of their political life, saw to
it that “Doctor Street” was never used in any official
capacity. And since they knew that only Southside
residents kept it up, they had notices posted in the stores,
barbershops, and restaurants in that part of the city saying
that the avenue running northerly and southerly from Shore
Road fronting the lake to the junction of routes 6 and 2
leading to Pennsylvania, and also running parallel to and
between Rutherford Avenue and Broadway, had alwaysbeen and would always be known as Mains Avenue and not
Doctor Street.
It was a genuinely clarifying public notice because it gave
Southside residents a way to keep their memories alive
and please the city legislators as well. They called it Not
Doctor Street, and were inclined to call the charity hospital
at its northern end No Mercy Hospital since it was 1931, on
the day following Mr. Smith’s leap from its cupola, before
the first colored expectant mother was allowed to give birth
inside its wards and not on its steps. The reason for the
hospital’s generosity to that particular woman was not the
fact that she was the only child of this Negro doctor, for
during his entire professional life he had never been
granted hospital privileges and only two of his patients
were ever admitted to Mercy, both white. Besides, the
doctor had been dead a long time by 1931. It must have
been Mr. Smith’s leap from the roof over their heads that
made them admit her. In any case, whether or not the little
insurance agent’s conviction that he could fly contributed to
the place of her delivery, it certainly contributed to its time.
When the dead doctor’s daughter saw Mr. Smith emerge
as promptly as he had promised from behind the cupola,
his wide blue silk wings curved forward around his chest,
she dropped her covered peck basket, spilling red velvet
rose petals. The wind blew them about, up, down, and into
small mounds of snow. Her half-grown daughters
scrambled about trying to catch them, while their mothermoaned and held the underside of her stomach. The rose-
petal scramble got a lot of attention, but the pregnant lady’s
moans did not. Everyone knew the girls had spent hour
after hour tracing, cutting, and stitching the costly velvet,
and that Gerhardt’s Department Store would be quick to
reject any that were soiled.
It was nice and gay there for a while. The men joined in
trying to collect the scraps before the snow soaked through
them—snatching them from a gust of wind or plucking them
delicately from the snow. And the very young children
couldn’t make up their minds whether to watch the man
circled in blue on the roof or the bits of red flashing around
on the ground. Their dilemma was solved when a woman
suddenly burst into song. The singer, standing at the back
of the crowd, was as poorly dressed as the doctor’s
daughter was well dressed. The latter had on a neat gray
coat with the traditional pregnant-woman bow at her navel,
a black cloche, and a pair of four-button ladies’ galoshes.
The singing woman wore a knitted navy cap pulled far down
over her forehead. She had wrapped herself up in an old
quilt instead of a winter coat. Her head cocked to one side,
her eyes fixed on Mr. Robert Smith, she sang in a powerful
contralto:
O Sugarman done fly away
Sugarman done goneSugarman cut across the sky
Sugarman gone home….
A few of the half a hundred or so people gathered there
nudged each other and sniggered. Others listened as
though it were the helpful and defining piano music in a
silent movie. They stood this way for some time, none of
them crying out to Mr. Smith, all of them preoccupied with
one or the other of the minor events about them, until the
hospital people came.
They had been watching from the windows—at first with
mild curiosity, then, as the crowd seemed to swell to the
very walls of the hospital, they watched with apprehension.
They wondered if one of those things that racial-uplift
groups were always organizing was taking place. But when
they saw neither placards nor speakers, they ventured
outside into the cold: white-coated surgeons, dark-jacketed
business and personnel clerks, and three nurses in
starched jumpers.
The sight of Mr. Smith and his wide blue wings transfixed
them for a few seconds, as did the woman’s singing and
the roses strewn about. Some of them thought briefly that
this was probably some form of worship. Philadelphia,
where Father Divine reigned, wasn’t all that far away.
Perhaps the young girls holding baskets of flowers weretwo of his virgins. But the laughter of a gold-toothed man
brought them back to their senses. They stopped
daydreaming and swiftly got down to business, giving
orders. Their shouts and bustling caused great confusion
where before there had been only a few men and some
girls playing with pieces of velvet and a woman singing.
One of the nurses, hoping to bring some efficiency into
the disorder, searched the faces around her until she saw a
stout woman who looked as though she might move the
earth if she wanted to.
“You,” she said, moving toward the stout woman. “Are
these your children?”
The stout woman turned her head slowly, her eyebrows
lifted at the carelessness of the address. Then, seeing
where the voice came from, she lowered her brows and
veiled her eyes.
“Ma’am?”
“Send one around back to the emergency office. Tell him
to tell the guard to get over here quick. That boy there can
go. That one.” She pointed to a cat-eyed boy about five or
six years old.
The stout woman slid her eyes down the nurse’s finger
and looked at the child she was pointing to.“Guitar, ma’am.”
“What?”
“Guitar.”
The nurse gazed at the stout woman as though she had
spoken Welsh. Then she closed her mouth, looked again at
the cat-eyed boy, and lacing her fingers, spoke her next
words very slowly to him.
“Listen. Go around to the back of the hospital to the
guard’s office. It will say ‘Emergency Admissions’ on the
door. A-D-M-I-S-I-O-N-S. But the guard will be there. Tell
him to get over here—on the double. Move now. Move!”
She unlaced her fingers and made scooping motions with
her hands, the palms pushing against the wintry air.
A man in a brown suit came toward her, puffing little
white clouds of breath. “Fire truck’s on its way. Get back
inside. You’ll freeze to death.”
The nurse nodded.
“You left out a s, ma’am,” the boy said. The North was
new to him and he had just begun to learn he could speak
up to white people. But she’d already gone, rubbing her
arms against the cold.
“Granny, she left out as.”“And a ‘please.’”
“You reckon he’ll jump?”
“A nutwagon do anything.”
“Who is he?”
“Collects insurance. A nutwagon.”
“Who is that lady singing?”
“That, baby, is the very last thing in pea-time.” But she
smiled when she looked at the singing woman, so the cat-
eyed boy listened to the musical performance with at least
as much interest as he devoted to the man flapping his
wings on top of the hospital.
The crowd was beginning to be a little nervous now that
the law was being called in. They each knew Mr. Smith. He
came to their houses twice a month to collect one dollar
and sixty-eight cents and write down on a little yellow card
both the date and their eighty-four cents a week payment.
They were always half a month or so behind, and talked
endlessly to him about paying ahead—after they had a
preliminary discussion about what he was doing back so
soon anyway.
“You back in here already? Look like I just got rid of you.”“I’m tired of seeing your face. Really tired.”
“I knew it. Soon’s I get two dimes back to back, here you
come. More regular than the reaper. Do Hoover know
about you?”
They kidded him, abused him, told their children to tell
him they were out or sick or gone to Pittsburgh. But they
held on to those little yellow cards as though they meant
something—laid them gently in the shoe box along with the
rent receipts, marriage licenses, and expired factory
identification badges. Mr. Smith smiled through it all,
managing to keep his eyes focused almost the whole time
on his customers’ feet. He wore a business suit for his
work, but his house was no better than theirs. He never had
a woman that any of them knew about and said nothing in
church but an occasional “Amen.” He never beat anybody
up and he wasn’t seen after dark, so they thought he was
probably a nice man. But he was heavily associated with
illness and death, neither of which was distinguishable from
the brown picture of the North Carolina Mutual Life Building
on the back of their yellow cards. Jumping from the roof of
Mercy was the most interesting thing he had done. None of
them had suspected he had it in him. Just goes to show,
they murmured to each other, you never really do know
about people.
The singing woman quieted down and, humming the
tune, walked through the crowd toward the rose-petal lady,who was still cradling her stomach.
“You should make yourself warm,” she whispered to her,
touching her lightly on the elbow. “A little bird’ll be here with
the morning.”
“Oh?” said the rose-petal lady. “Tomorrow morning?”
“That’s the only morning coming.”
“It can’t be,” the rose-petal lady said. “It’s too soon.”
“No it ain’t. Right on time.”
The women were looking deep into each other’s eyes
when a loud roar went up from the crowd—a kind of wavy
oo
 sound. Mr. Smith had lost his balance for a second, and
was trying gallantly to hold on to a triangle of wood that
jutted from the cupola. Immediately the singing woman
began again:
O Sugarman done fly
O Sugarman done gone…
Downtown the firemen pulled on their greatcoats, but
when they arrived at Mercy, Mr. Smith had seen the rose
petals, heard the music, and leaped on into the air.The next day a colored baby was born inside Mercy for
the first time. Mr. Smith’s blue silk wings must have left their
mark, because when the little boy discovered, at four, the
same thing Mr. Smith had learned earlier—that only birds
and airplanes could fly—he lost all interest in himself. To
have to live without that single gift saddened him and left
his imagination so bereft that he appeared dull even to the
women who did not hate his mother. The ones who did,
who accepted her invitations to tea and envied the doctor’s
big dark house of twelve rooms and the green sedan,
called him “peculiar.” The others, who knew that the house
was more prison than palace, and that the Dodge sedan
was for Sunday drives only, felt sorry for Ruth Foster and
her dry daughters, and called her son “deep.” Even
mysterious.
“Did he come with a caul?”
“You should have dried it and made him some tea from it
to drink. If you don’t he’ll see ghosts.”
“You believe that?”
“I don’t, but that’s what the old people say.”
“Well, he’s a deep one anyway. Look at his eyes.”
And they pried pieces of baked-too-fast sunshine cake
from the roofs of their mouths and looked once more intothe boy’s eyes. He met their gaze as best he could until,
after a pleading glance toward his mother, he was allowed
to leave the room.
It took some planning to walk out of the parlor, his back
washed with the hum of their voices, open the heavy double
doors leading to the dining room, slip up the stairs past all
those bedrooms, and not arouse the attention of Lena and
Corinthians sitting like big baby dolls before a table
heaped with scraps of red velvet. His sisters made roses in
the afternoon. Bright, lifeless roses that lay in peck baskets
for months until the specialty buyer at Gerhardt’s sent
Freddie the janitor over to tell the girls that they could use
another gross. If he did manage to slip by his sisters and
avoid their casual malice, he knelt in his room at the
window sill and wondered again and again why he had to
stay level on the ground. The quiet that suffused the
doctor’s house then, broken only by the murmur of the
women eating sunshine cake, was only that: quiet. It was
not peaceful, for it was preceded by and would soon be
terminated by the presence of Macon Dead.
Solid, rumbling, likely to erupt without prior notice, Macon
kept each member of his family awkward with fear. His
hatred of his wife glittered and sparked in every word he
spoke to her. The disappointment he felt in his daughters
sifted down on them like ash, dulling their buttery
complexions and choking the lilt out of what should have
been girlish voices. Under the frozen heat of his glance theytripped over doorsills and dropped the salt cellar into the
yolks of their poached eggs. The way he mangled their
grace, wit, and self-esteem was the single excitement of
their days. Without the tension and drama he ignited, they
might not have known what to do with themselves. In his
absence his daughters bent their necks over blood-red
squares of velvet and waited eagerly for any hint of him,
and his wife, Ruth, began her days stunned into stillness by
her husband’s contempt and ended them wholly animated
by it.
When she closed the door behind her afternoon guests,
and let the quiet smile die from her lips, she began the
preparation of food her husband found impossible to eat.
She did not try to make her meals nauseating; she simply
didn’t know how not to. She would notice that the sunshine
cake was too haggled to put before him and decide on a
rennet dessert. But the grinding of the veal and beef for a
meat loaf took so long she not only forgot the pork, settling
for bacon drippings poured over the meat, she had no time
to make a dessert at all. Hurriedly, then, she began to set
the table. As she unfolded the white linen and let it billow
over the fine mahogany table, she would look once more at
the large water mark. She never set the table or passed
through the dining room without looking at it. Like a
lighthouse keeper drawn to his window to gaze once again
at the sea, or a prisoner automatically searching out the sun
as he steps into the yard for his hour of exercise, Ruth
looked for the water mark several times during the day. Sheknew it was there, would always be there, but she needed
to confirm its presence. Like the keeper of the lighthouse
and the prisoner, she regarded it as a mooring, a
checkpoint, some stable visual object that assured her that
the world was still there; that this was life and not a dream.
That she was alive somewhere, inside, which she
acknowledged to be true only because a thing she knew
intimately was out there, outside herself.
Even in the cave of sleep, without dreaming of it or
thinking of it at all, she felt its presence. Oh, she talked
endlessly to her daughters and her guests about how to get
rid of it—what might hide this single flaw on the splendid
wood: Vaseline, tobacco juice, iodine, a sanding followed
by linseed oil. She had tried them all. But her glance was
nutritious; the spot became, if anything, more pronounced
as the years passed.
The cloudy gray circle identified the place where the bowl
filled every day during the doctor’s life with fresh flowers
had stood. Every day. And when there were no flowers, it
held a leaf arrangement, a gathering of twigs and berries,
pussy willow, Scotch pine…. But always something to
grace the dinner table in the evening.
It was for her father a touch that distinguished his own
family from the people among whom they lived. For Ruth it
was the summation of the affectionate elegance with which
she believed her childhood had been surrounded. WhenMacon married her and moved into Doctor’s house, she
kept up the centerpiece-arranging. Then came the time she
walked down to the shore through the roughest part of the
city to get some driftwood. She had seen an arrangement
of driftwood and dried seaweed in the homemakers
section of the newspaper. It was a damp November day,
and Doctor was paralyzed even then and taking liquid food
in his bedroom. The wind had lifted her skirt from around
her ankles and cut through her laced shoes. She’d had to
rub her feet down with warm olive oil when she got back. At
dinner, where just the two of them sat, she turned toward
her husband and asked him how he liked the centerpiece.
“Most people overlook things like that. They see it, but they
don’t see anything beautiful in it. They don’t see that nature
has already made it as perfect as it can be. Look at it from
the side. It is pretty, isn’t it?”
Her husband looked at the driftwood with its lacy beige
seaweed, and without moving his head, said, “Your chicken
is red at the bone. And there is probably a potato dish that
is supposed to have lumps in it. Mashed ain’t the dish.”
Ruth let the seaweed disintegrate, and later, when its
veins and stems dropped and curled into brown scabs on
the table, she removed the bowl and brushed away the
scabs. But the water mark, hidden by the bowl all these
years, was exposed. And once exposed, it behaved as
though it were itself a plant and flourished into a huge
suede-gray flower that throbbed like fever, and sighed likethe shift of sand dunes. But it could also be still. Patient,
restful, and still.
But there was nothing you could do with a mooring
except acknowledge it, use it for the verification of some
idea you wanted to keep alive. Something else is needed
to get from sunup to sundown: a balm, a gentle touch or
nuzzling of some sort. So Ruth rose up and out of her
guileless inefficiency to claim her bit of balm right after the
preparation of dinner and just before the return of her
husband from his office. It was one of her two secret
indulgences—the one that involved her son—and part of
the pleasure it gave her came from the room in which she
did it. A damp greenness lived there, made by the
evergreen that pressed against the window and filtered the
light. It was just a little room that Doctor had called a study,
and aside from a sewing machine that stood in the corner
along with a dress form, there was only a rocker and tiny
footstool. She sat in this room holding her son on her lap,
staring at his closed eyelids and listening to the sound of
his sucking. Staring not so much from maternal joy as from
a wish to avoid seeing his legs dangling almost to the floor.
In late afternoon, before her husband closed his office
and came home, she called her son to her. When he came
into the little room she unbuttoned her blouse and smiled.
He was too young to be dazzled by her nipples, but he was
old enough to be bored by the flat taste of mother’s milk, so
he came reluctantly, as to a chore, and lay as he had atleast once each day of his life in his mother’s arms, and
tried to pull the thin, faintly sweet milk from her flesh without
hurting her with his teeth.
She felt him. His restraint, his courtesy, his indifference,
all of which pushed her into fantasy. She had the distinct
impression that his lips were pulling from her a thread of
light. It was as though she were a cauldron issuing spinning
gold. Like the miller’s daughter—the one who sat at night in
a straw-filled room, thrilled with the secret power
Rumpelstiltskin had given her: to see golden thread stream
from her very own shuttle. And that was the other part of her
pleasure, a pleasure she hated to give up. So when
Freddie the janitor, who liked to pretend he was a friend of
the family and not just their flunky as well as their tenant,
brought his rent to the doctor’s house late one day and
looked in the window past the evergreen, the terror that
sprang to Ruth’s eyes came from the quick realization that
she was to lose fully half of what made her daily life
bearable. Freddie, however, interpreted her look as simple
shame, but that didn’t stop him from grinning.
“Have mercy. I be damn.”
He fought the evergreen for a better look, hampered
more by his laughter than by the branches. Ruth jumped up
as quickly as she could and covered her breast, dropping
her son on the floor and confirming for him what he had
begun to suspect—that these were strange and wrong.Before either mother or son could speak, rearrange
themselves properly, or even exchange looks, Freddie had
run around the house, climbed the porch steps, and was
calling them between gulps of laughter.
“Miss Rufie. Miss Rufie. Where you? Where you all at?”
He opened the door to the green room as though it were
his now.
“I be damn, Miss Rufie. When the last time I seen that? I
don’t even know the last time I seen that. I mean, ain’t
nothing wrong with it. I mean, old folks swear by it. It’s just,
you know, you don’t see it up here much….” But his eyes
were on the boy. Appreciative eyes that communicated
some complicity she was excluded from. Freddie looked
the boy up and down, taking in the steady but secretive
eyes and the startling contrast between Ruth’s lemony skin
and the boy’s black skin. “Used to be a lot of womenfolk
nurse they kids a long time down South. Lot of ’em. But you
don’t see it much no more. I knew a family—the mother
wasn’t too quick, though—nursed hers till the boy, I reckon,
was near ‘bout thirteen. But that’s a bit much, ain’t it?” All
the time he chattered, he rubbed his chin and looked at the
boy. Finally he stopped, and gave a long low chuckle. He’d
found the phrase he’d been searching for. “A milkman.
That’s what you got here, Miss Rufie. A natural milkman if
ever I seen one. Look out, womens. Here he come. Huh!”
Freddie carried his discovery not only into the homes inRuth’s neighborhood, but to Southside, where he lived and
where Macon Dead owned rent houses. So Ruth kept close
to home and had no afternoon guests for the better part of
two months, to keep from hearing that her son had been
rechristened with a name he was never able to shake and
that did nothing to improve either one’s relationship with his
father.
Macon Dead never knew how it came about—how his
only son acquired the nickname that stuck in spite of his
own refusal to use it or acknowledge it. It was a matter that
concerned him a good deal, for the giving of names in his
family was always surrounded by what he believed to be
monumental foolishness. No one mentioned to him the
incident out of which the nickname grew because he was a
difficult man to approach—a hard man, with a manner so
cool it discouraged casual or spontaneous conversation.
Only Freddie the janitor took liberties with Macon Dead,
liberties he purchased with the services he rendered, and
Freddie was the last person on earth to tell him. So Macon
Dead neither heard of nor visualized Ruth’s sudden terror,
her awkward jump from the rocking chair, the boy’s fall
broken by the tiny footstool, or Freddie’s amused, admiring
summation of the situation.
Without knowing any of the details, however, he guessed,
with the accuracy of a mind sharpened by hatred, that the
name he heard schoolchildren call his son, the name he
overheard the ragman use when he paid the boy threecents for a bundle of old clothes—he guessed that this
name was not clean. Milkman. It certainly didn’t sound like
the honest job of a dairyman, or bring to his mind cold
bright cans standing on the back porch, glittering like
captains on guard. It sounded dirty, intimate, and hot. He
knew that wherever the name came from, it had something
to do with his wife and was, like the emotion he always felt
when thinking of her, coated with disgust.
This disgust and the uneasiness with which he regarded
his son affected everything he did in that city. If he could
have felt sad, simply sad, it would have relieved him.
Fifteen years of regret at not having a son had become the
bitterness of finally having one in the most revolting
circumstances.
There had been a time when he had a head full of hair
and when Ruth wore lovely complicated underwear that he
deliberately took a long time to undo. When all of his
foreplay was untying, unclasping, unbuckling the snaps and
strings of what must have been the most beautiful, the most
delicate, the whitest and softest underwear on earth. Each
eye of her corset he toyed with (and there were forty—
twenty on each side); each gros-grain ribbon that threaded
its pale-blue way through the snowy top of her bodice he
unlaced. He not only undid the blue bow; he pulled it all the
way out of the hem, so she had to rethread it afterward with
a safety pin. The elastic bands that connected her
perspiration shields to her slip he unsnapped and snappedagain, teasing her and himself with the sound of the snaps
and the thrill of his fingertips on her shoulders. They never
spoke during these undressings. But they giggled
occasionally, and as when children play “doctor,”
undressing of course was the best part.
When Ruth was naked and lying there as moist and
crumbly as unbleached sugar, he bent to unlace her shoes.
That was the final delight, for once he had undressed her
feet, had peeled her stockings down over her ankles and
toes, he entered her and ejaculated quickly. She liked it that
way. So did he. And in almost twenty years during which he
had not laid eyes on her naked feet, he missed only the
underwear.
Once he believed that the sight of her mouth on the dead
man’s fingers would be the thing he would remember
always. He was wrong. Little by little he remembered fewer
and fewer of the details, until finally he had to imagine them,
even fabricate them, guess what they must have been. The
image left him, but the odiousness never did. For the
nourishment of his outrage he depended on the memory of
her underwear; those round, innocent corset eyes now lost
to him forever.
So if the people were calling his son Milkman, and if she
was lowering her eyelids and dabbing at the sweat on her
top lip when she heard it, there was definitely some filthy
connection and it did not matter at all to Macon Deadwhether anyone gave him the details or not.
And they didn’t. Nobody both dared enough and cared
enough to tell him. The ones who cared enough, Lena and
Corinthians, the living proof of those years of undressing
his wife, did not dare. And the one person who dared to but
didn’t care to was the one person in the world he hated
more than his wife in spite of the fact that she was his
sister. He had not crossed the tracks to see her since his
son was born and he had no intention of renewing their
relationship now.
Macon Dead dug in his pocket for his keys, and curled
his fingers around them, letting their bunchy solidity calm
him. They were the keys to all the doors of his houses (only
four true houses; the rest were really shacks), and he
fondled them from time to time as he walked down Not
Doctor Street to his office. At least he thought of it as his
office, had even painted the word OFFICE on the door. But
the plate-glass window contradicted him. In peeling gold
letters arranged in a semicircle, his business establishment
was declared to be Sonny’s Shop. Scraping the previous
owner’s name off was hardly worth the trouble since he
couldn’t scrape it from anybody’s mind. His storefront office
was never called anything but Sonny’s Shop, although
nobody now could remember thirty years back, when,
presumably, Sonny did something or other there.
He walked there now—strutted is the better word, for hehad a high behind and an athlete’s stride—thinking of
names. Surely, he thought, he and his sister had some
ancestor, some lithe young man with onyx skin and legs as
straight as cane stalks, who had a name that was real. A
name given to him at birth with love and seriousness. A
name that was not a joke, nor a disguise, nor a brand
name. But who this lithe young man was, and where his
cane-stalk legs carried him from or to, could never be
known. No. Nor his name. His own parents, in some mood
of perverseness or resignation, had agreed to abide by a
naming done to them by somebody who couldn’t have
cared less. Agreed to take and pass on to all their issue
this heavy name scrawled in perfect thoughtlessness by a
drunken Yankee in the Union Army. A literal slip of the pen
handed to his father on a piece of paper and which he
handed on to his only son, and his son likewise handed on
to his; Macon Dead who begat a second Macon Dead who
married Ruth Foster (Dead) and begat Magdalene called
Lena Dead and First Corinthians Dead and (when he least
expected it) another Macon Dead, now known to the part of
the world that mattered as Milkman Dead. And as if that
were not enough, a sister named Pilate Dead, who would
never mention to her brother the circumstances or the
details of this foolish misnaming of his son because the
whole thing would have delighted her. She would savor it,
maybe fold it too in a brass box and hang it from her other
ear.
He had cooperated as a young father with the blindselection of names from the Bible for every child other than
the first male. And abided by whatever the finger pointed to,
for he knew every configuration of the naming of his sister.
How his father, confused and melancholy over his wife’s
death in childbirth, had thumbed through the Bible, and
since he could not read a word, chose a group of letters
that seemed to him strong and handsome; saw in them a
large figure that looked like a tree hanging in some princely
but protective way over a row of smaller trees. How he had
copied the group of letters out on a piece of brown paper;
copied, as illiterate people do, every curlicue, arch, and
bend in the letters, and presented it to the midwife.
“That’s the baby’s name.”
“You want this for the baby’s name?”
“I want that for the baby’s name. Say it.”
“You can’t name the baby this.”
“Say it.”
“It’s a man’s name.”
“Say it.”
“Pilate.”
“What?”“Pilate. You wrote down Pilate.”
“Like a riverboat pilot?”
“No. Not like no riverboat pilot. Like a Christ-killing Pilate.
You can’t get much worse than that for a name. And a baby
girl at that.”
“That’s where my finger went down at.”
“Well, your brain ain’t got to follow it. You don’t want to
give this motherless child the name of the man that killed
Jesus, do you?”
“I asked Jesus to save me my wife.”
“Careful, Macon.”
“I asked him all night long.”
“He give you your baby.”
“Yes. He did. Baby name Pilate.”
“Jesus, have mercy.”
“Where you going with that piece of paper?”
“It’s going back where it came from. Right in the Devil’s
flames.”“Give it here. It come from the Bible. It stays in the Bible.”
And it did stay there, until the baby girl turned twelve and
took it out, folded it up into a tiny knot and put it in a little
brass box, and strung the entire contraption through her left
earlobe. Fluky about her own name at twelve, how much
more fluky she’d become since then Macon could only
guess. But he knew for certain that she would treat the
naming of the third Macon Dead with the same respect and
awe she had treated the boy’s birth.
Macon Dead remembered when his son was born, how
she seemed to be more interested in this first nephew of
hers than she was in her own daughter, and even that
daughter’s daughter. Long after Ruth was up and about, as
capable as she ever would be—and that wasn’t much—of
running the house again, Pilate continued to visit, her
shoelaces undone, a knitted cap pulled down over her
forehead, bringing her foolish earring and sickening smell
into the kitchen. He had not seen her since he was sixteen
years old, until a year before the birth of his son, when she
appeared in his city. Now she was acting like an in-law, like
an aunt, dabbling at helping Ruth and the girls, but having
no interest in or knowledge of decent housekeeping, she
got in the way. Finally she just sat in a chair near the crib,
singing to the baby. That wasn’t so bad, but what Macon
Dead remembered most was the expression on her face.
Surprise, it looked like, and eagerness. But so intense it
made him uneasy. Or perhaps it was more than that.Perhaps it was seeing her all those years after they had
separated outside that cave, and remembering his anger
and her betrayal. How far down she had slid since then.
She had cut the last thread of propriety. At one time she
had been the dearest thing in the world to him. Now she
was odd, murky, and worst of all, unkempt. A regular source
of embarrassment, if he would allow it. But he would not
allow it.
Finally he had told her not to come again until she could
show some respect for herself. Could get a real job instead
of running a wine house.
“Why can’t you dress like a woman?” He was standing by
the stove. “What’s that sailor’s cap doing on your head?
Don’t you have stockings? What are you trying to make me
look like in this town?” He trembled with the thought of the
white men in the bank—the men who helped him buy and
mortgage houses—discovering that this raggedy
bootlegger was his sister. That the propertied Negro who
handled his business so well and who lived in the big house
on Not Doctor Street had a sister who had a daughter but
no husband, and that daughter had a daughter but no
husband. A collection of lunatics who made wine and sang
in the streets “like common street women! Just like
common street women!”
Pilate had sat there listening to him, her wondering eyes
resting on his face. Then she said, “I been worried sickabout you too, Macon.”
Exasperated, he had gone to the kitchen door. “Go
‘head, Pilate. Go on now. I’m on the thin side of evil and
trying not to break through.”
Pilate stood up, wrapped her quilt around her, and with a
last fond look at the baby, left through the kitchen door. She
never came back.
When Macon Dead got to the front door of his office he
saw a stout woman and two young boys standing a few feet
away. Macon unlocked his door, walked over to his desk,
and settled himself behind it. As he was thumbing through
his accounts book, the stout woman entered, alone.
“Afternoon Mr. Dead, sir. I’m Mrs. Bains. Live over at
number three on Fifteenth Street.”
Macon Dead remembered—not the woman, but the
circumstances at number three. His tenant’s grandmother
or aunt or something had moved in there and the rent was
long overdue.
“Yes, Mrs. Bains. You got something for me?”
“Well, that’s what I come to talk to you about. You know
Cency left all them babies with me. And my relief check
ain’t no more’n it take to keep a well-grown yard dog alive
—half alive, I should say.”“Your rent is four dollars a month, Mrs. Bains. You two
months behind already.”
“I do know that, Mr. Dead, sir, but babies can’t make it
with nothing to put in they stomach.”
Their voices were low, polite, without any hint of conflict.
“Can they make it in the street, Mrs. Bains? That’s where
they gonna be if you don’t figure out some way to get me
my money.”
“No, sir. They can’t make it in the street. We need both, I
reckon. Same as yours does.”
“Then you better rustle it up, Mrs. Bains. You got till”—he
swiveled around to consult the calendar on the wall—“till
Saturday coming. Saturday, Mrs. Bains. Not Sunday. Not
Monday. Saturday.”
If she had been younger and had more juice, the glitter in
her eyes would have washed down onto her cheeks. New,
at her time of life, it simply gleamed. She pressed the flat of
her hand on Macon Dead’s desk and, holding the gleam
steady in her eyes, pushed herself up from the chair. She
turned her head a little to look out the plate-glass window,
and then back at him.
“What’s it gonna profit you, Mr. Dead, sir, to put me andthem children out?”
“Saturday, Mrs. Bains.”
Lowering her head, Mrs. Bains whispered something
and walked slowly and heavily from the office. As she
closed the door to Sonny’s Shop, her grandchildren moved
out of the sunlight into the shadow where she stood.
“What he say, Granny?”
Mrs. Bains put a hand on the taller boy’s hair and
fingered it lightly, absently searching with her nails for tetter
spots.
“He must’ve told her no,” said the other boy.
“Do we got to move?” The tall boy tossed his head free
of her fingers and looked at her sideways. His cat eyes
were gashes of gold.
Mrs. Bains let her hand fall to her side. “A nigger in
business is a terrible thing to see. A terrible, terrible thing to
see.”
The boys looked at each other and back at their
grandmother. Their lips were parted as though they had
heard something important.
When Mrs. Bains closed the door, Macon Dead wentback to the pages of his accounts book, running his
fingertips over the figures and thinking with the unoccupied
part of his mind about the first time he called on Ruth
Foster’s father. He had only two keys in his pocket then,
and if he had let people like the woman who just left have
their way, he wouldn’t have had any keys at all. It was
because of those keys that he could dare to walk over to
that part of Not Doctor Street (it was still Doctor Street then)
and approach the most important Negro in the city. To lift
the lion’s paw knocker, to entertain thoughts of marrying the
doctor’s daughter was possible because each key
represented a house which he owned at the time. Without
those keys he would have floated away at the doctor’s first
word: “Yes?” Or he would have melted like new wax under
the heat of that pale eye. Instead he was able to say that he
had been introduced to his daughter, Miss Ruth Foster, and
would appreciate having the doctor’s permission to keep
her company now and then. That his intentions were
honorable and that he himself was certainly worthy of the
doctor’s consideration as a gentleman friend for Miss
Foster since, at twenty-five, he was already a colored man
of property.
“I don’t know anything about you,” the doctor said, “other
than your name, which I don’t like, but I will abide by my
daughter’s preference.”
In fact the doctor knew a good deal about him and was
more grateful to this tall young man than he ever allowedhimself to show. Fond as he was of his only child, useful as
she was in his house since his wife had died, lately he had
begun to chafe under her devotion. Her steady beam of
love was unsettling, and she had never dropped those
expressions of affection that had been so lovable in her
childhood. The good-night kiss was itself a masterpiece of
slow-wittedness on her part and discomfort on his. At
sixteen, she still insisted on having him come to her at
night, sit on her bed, exchange a few pleasantries, and
plant a kiss on her lips. Perhaps it was the loud silence of
his dead wife, perhaps it was Ruth’s disturbing
resemblance to her mother. More probably it was the
ecstasy that always seemed to be shining in Ruth’s face
when he bent to kiss her—an ecstasy he felt inappropriate
to the occasion.
None of that, of course, did he describe to the young man
who came to call. Which is why Macon Dead still believed
the magic had lain in the two keys.
In the middle of his reverie, Macon was interrupted by
rapid tapping on the window. He looked up, saw Freddie
peeping through the gold lettering, and nodded for him to
enter. A gold-toothed bantamweight, Freddie was as much
of a town crier as Southside had. It was this same rapid
tapping on the window-pane, the same flash-of-gold smile
that had preceded his now-famous scream to Macon: “Mr.
Smith went splat!” It was obvious to Macon that Freddie
now had news of another calamity.“Porter gone crazy drunk again! Got his shotgun!”
“Who’s he out for?” Macon began closing books and
opening desk drawers. Porter was a tenant and tomorrow
was collection day.
“Ain’t out for nobody in particular. Just perched himself
up in the attic window and commenced to waving a
shotgun. Say he gotta kill him somebody before morning.”
“He go to work today?”
“Yep. Caught the eagle too.”
“Drunk it all up?”
“Not all of it. He only got one bottle, and he still got a fist
fulla money.”
“Who’s crazy enough to sell him any liquor?”
Freddie showed a few gold teeth but said nothing, so
Macon knew it was Pilate. He locked all his drawers save
one—the one he unlocked and took a small .32 from.
“Police warn every bootlegger in the county, and he still
gets it somehow.” Macon went on with the charade,
pretending he didn’t know his sister was the one Porter and
anybody else—adult, child, or beast—could buy wine from.
He thought for the hundredth time that she needed to be injail and that he would be willing to put her there if he could
be sure she wouldn’t loudmouth him and make him seem
trashy in the eyes of the law—and the banks.
“You know how to use that thing, Mr. Dead, sir?”
“I know how.”
“Porter’s crazy when he drunk.”
“I know what he is.”
“How you aiming to get him down?”
“I ain’t aiming to get him down. I’m aiming to get my
money down. He can go on and die up there if he wants to.
But if he don’t toss me my rent, I’m going to blow him out of
that window.”
Freddie’s giggle was soft, but his teeth strengthened its
impact. A born flunky, he loved gossip and the telling of it.
He was the ear that heard every murmur of complaint, every
name-calling; and his was the eye that saw everything: the
secret loving glances, the fights, the new dresses.
Macon knew Freddie as a fool and a liar, but a reliable
liar. He was always right about his facts and always wrong
about the motives that produced the facts. Just as now he
was right about Porter having a shotgun, being in the attic
window, and being drunk. But Porter was not waiting to killsomebody, meaning anybody, before morning. In fact he
was very specific about whom he wanted to kill—himself.
However, he did have a precondition which he shouted
down, loud and clear, from the attic. “I want to fuck! Send
me up somebody to fuck! Hear me? Send me up
somebody, I tell ya, or I’ma blow my brains out!”
As Macon and Freddie approached the yard, the women
from the rooming house were hollering answers to Porter’s
plea.
“What kinda bargain is that?”
“Kill yourself first and then we’ll send you somebody.”
“Do it have to be a woman?”
“Do it got to be human?”
“Do it got to be alive?”
“Can it be a piece of liver?”
“Put that thing down and throw me my goddam money!”
Macon’s voice cut through the women’s fun. “Float those
dollars down here, nigger, then blow yourself up!”
Porter turned and aimed his shotgun at Macon.
“If you pull that trigger,” shouted Macon, “you better notmiss. If you take a shot you better make sure I’m dead,
cause if you don’t I’m gonna shoot your balls up in your
throat!” He pulled out his own weapon. “Now get the hell
outta that window!”
Porter hesitated for only a second, before turning the
barrel of the shotgun toward himself—or trying to. Its length
made it difficult; his drunkenness made it impossible.
Struggling to get the right angle, he was suddenly
distracted. He leaned his shotgun on the window sill, pulled
out his penis and in a high arc, peed over the heads of the
women, making them scream and run in a panic that the
shotgun had not been able to create. Macon rubbed the
back of his head while Freddie bent double with laughter.
For more than an hour Porter held them at bay: cowering,
screaming, threatening, urinating, and interspersing all of it
with pleas for a woman.
He would cry great shoulder-heaving sobs, followed by
more screams.
“I love ya! I love ya all. Don’t act like that. You women.
Stop it. Don’t act like that. Don’t you see I love ya? I’d die
for ya, kill for ya. I’m saying I love ya. I’m telling ya. Oh, God
have mercy. What I’m gonna do? What in this fuckin world
am I gonna dooooo?”
Tears streamed down his face and he cradled the barrelof the shotgun in his arms as though it were the woman he
had been begging for, searching for, all his life. “Gimme
hate, Lord,” he whimpered. “I’ll take hate any day. But don’t
give me love. I can’t take no more love, Lord. I can’t carry it.
Just like Mr. Smith. He couldn’t carry it. It’s too heavy.
Jesus,
 you
 know. You know all about it. Ain’t it heavy?
Jesus? Ain’t love heavy? Don’t you see, Lord? You own
son couldn’t carry it. If it killed Him, what You think it’s gonna
do to me? Huh? Huh?” He was getting angry again.
“Come down outta there, nigger!” Macon’s voice was still
loud, but it was getting weary.
“And you, you baby-dicked baboon”—he tried to point at
Macon–“you the worst. You need killin, you really
 need
 killin.
You
 know
 why? Well, I’m gonna tell you why. I know why.
Everybody…”
Porter slumped down in the window, muttering,
“Everybody know why,” and fell fast asleep. As he sank
deeper into it, the shotgun slipped from his hand, rattled
down the roof, and hit the ground with a loud explosion. The
shot zipped past a by stander’s shoe and blew a hole in the
tire of a stripped Dodge parked in the road.
“Go get my money,” Macon said.
“Me?” Freddie asked. “Suppose he…”“Go get me my money.”
Porter was snoring. Through the blast of the gun and the
picking of his pocket he slept like a baby.
When Macon walked out of the yard, the sun had
disappeared behind the bread company. Tired, irritable; he
walked down Fifteenth Street, glancing up as he passed
one of his other houses, its silhouette melting in the light
that trembled between dusk and twilight. Scattered here
and there, his houses stretched up beyond him like squat
ghosts with hooded eyes. He didn’t like to look at them in
this light. During the day they were reassuring to see; now
they did not seem to belong to him at all—in fact he felt as
though the houses were in league with one another to make
him feel like the outsider, the propertyless, landless
wanderer. It was this feeling of loneliness that made him
decide to take a shortcut back to Not Doctor Street, even
though to do so would lead him past his sister’s house. In
the gathering darkness, he was sure his passing would be
unnoticed by her. He crossed a yard and followed a fence
that led into Darling Street where Pilate lived in a narrow
single-story house whose basement seemed to be rising
from rather than settling into the ground. She had no
electricity because she would not pay for the service. Nor
for gas. At night she and her daughter lit the house with
candles and kerosene lamps; they warmed themselves and
cooked with wood and coal, pumped kitchen water into a
dry sink through a pipeline from a well and lived pretty muchas though progress was a word that meant walking a little
farther on down the road.
Her house sat eighty feet from the sidewalk and was
backed by four huge pine trees, from which she got the
needles she stuck into her mattress. Seeing the pine trees
started him thinking about her mouth; how she loved, as a
girl, to chew pine needles and as a result smelled even then
like a forest. For a dozen years she had been like his own
child. After their mother died, she had come struggling out
of the womb without help from throbbing muscles or the
pressure of swift womb water. As a result, for all the years
he knew her, her stomach was as smooth and sturdy as her
back, at no place interrupted by a navel. It was the absence
of a navel that convinced people that she had not come into
this world through normal channels; had never lain, floated,
or grown in some warm and liquid place connected by a
tissue-thin tube to a reliable source of human nourishment.
Macon knew otherwise, because he was there and had
seen the eyes of the midwife as his mother’s legs
collapsed. And heard as well her shouts when the baby,
who they had believed was dead also, inched its way
headfirst out of a still, silent, and indifferent cave of flesh,
dragging her own cord and her own afterbirth behind her.
But the rest was true. Once the new baby’s lifeline was cut,
the cord stump shriveled, fell off, and left no trace of having
ever existed, which, as a young boy taking care of his baby
sister, he thought no more strange than a bald head. He
was seventeen years old, irreparably separated from herand already pressing forward in his drive for wealth, when
he learned that there was probably not another stomach
like hers on earth.
Now, nearing her yard, he trusted that the dark would
keep anyone in her house from seeing him. He did not even
look to his left as he walked by it. But then he heard the
music. They were singing. All of them. Pilate, Reba, and
Reba’s daughter, Hagar. There was no one on the street
that he could see; people were at supper, licking their
fingers, blowing into saucers of coffee, and no doubt
chatterning about Porter’s escapade and Macon’s fearless
confrontation of the wild man in the attic. There were no
street lights in this part of town; only the moon directed the
way of a pedestrian. Macon walked on, resisting as best he
could the sound of the voices that followed him. He was
rapidly approaching a part of the road where the music
could not follow, when he saw, like a scene on the back of a
postcard, a picture of where he was headed—his own
home; his wife’s narrow unyielding back; his daughters,
boiled dry from years of yearning; his son, to whom he
could speak only if his words held some command or
criticism. “Hello, Daddy.” “Hello, son, tuck your shirt in.” “I
found a dead bird, Daddy.” “Don’t bring that mess in this
house.” There was no music there, and tonight he wanted
just a bit of music—from the person who had been his first
caring for.
He turned back and walked slowly toward Pilate’s house.They were singing some melody that Pilate was leading. A
phrase that the other two were taking up and building on.
Her powerful contralto, Reba’s piercing soprano in
counterpoint, and the soft voice of the girl, Hagar, who must
be about ten or eleven now, pulled him like a carpet tack
under the influence of a magnet.
Surrendering to the sound, Macon moved closer. He
wanted no conversation, no witness, only to listen and
perhaps to see the three of them, the source of that music
that made him think of fields and wild turkey and calico.
Treading as lightly as he could, he crept up to the side
window where the candlelight flickered lowest, and peeped
in. Reba was cutting her toenails with a kitchen knife or a
switchblade, her long neck bent almost to her knees. The
girl, Hagar, was braiding her hair, while Pilate, whose face
he could not see because her back was to the window, was
stirring something in a pot. Wine pulp, perhaps. Macon
knew it was not food she was stirring, for she and her
daughters ate like children. Whatever they had a taste for.
No meal was ever planned or balanced or served. Nor was
there any gathering at the table. Pilate might bake hot
bread and each one of them would eat it with butter
whenever she felt like it. Or there might be grapes, left over
from the winemaking, or peaches for days on end. If one of
them bought a gallon of milk they drank it until it was gone. If
another got a half bushel of tomatoes or a dozen ears of
corn, they ate them until they were gone too. They ate what
they had or came across or had a craving for. Profits fromtheir wine-selling evaporated like sea water in a hot wind—
going for junk jewelry for Hagar, Reba’s gifts to men, and
he didn’t know what all.
Near the window, hidden by the dark, he felt the irritability
of the day drain from him and relished the effortless beauty
of the women singing in the candlelight. Reba’s soft profile,
Hagar’s hands moving, moving in her heavy hair, and
Pilate. He knew her face better than he knew his own.
Singing now, her face would be a mask; all emotion and
passion would have left her features and entered her voice.
But he knew that when she was neither singing nor talking,
her face was animated by her constantly moving lips. She
chewed things. As a baby, as a very young girl, she kept
things in her mouth—straw from brooms, gristle, buttons,
seeds, leaves, string, and her favorite, when he could find
some for her, rubber bands and India rubber erasers. Her
lips were alive with small movements. If you were close to
her, you wondered if she was about to smile or was she
merely shifting a straw from the baseline of her gums to her
tongue. Perhaps she was dislodging a curl of rubber band
from inside her cheek, or was she really smiling? From a
distance she appeared to be whispering to herself, when
she was only nibbling or splitting tiny seeds with her front
teeth. Her lips were darker than her skin, wine-stained,
blueberry-dyed, so her face had a cosmetic look—as
though she had applied a very dark lipstick neatly and
blotted away its shine on a scrap of newspaper.As Macon felt himself softening under the weight of
memory and music, the song died down. The air was quiet
and yet Macon Dead could not leave. He liked looking at
them freely this way. They didn’t move. They simply
stopped singing and Reba went on paring her toenails,
Hagar threaded and unthreaded her hair, and Pilate
swayed like a willow over her stirring.Chapter 2
Only Magdalene called Lena and First Corinthians were
genuinely happy when the big Packard rolled evenly and
silently out of the driveway. They alone had a sense of
adventure and were flagrant in their enjoyment of the
automobile’s plushness. Each had a window to herself and
commanded an unobstructed view of the summer day flying
past them. And each was both old enough and young
enough to actually believe she was a princess riding in a
regal chariot driven by a powerful coachman. In the back
seat, away from the notice of Macon and Ruth, they slipped
off their patent leather pumps, rolled their stockings down
over their knees, and watched the men walking down the
streets.
These rides that the family took on Sunday afternoons
had become rituals and much too important for Macon to
enjoy. For him it was a way to satisfy himself that he was
indeed a successful man. It was a less ambitious ritual for
Ruth, but a way, nevertheless, for her to display her family.
For the little boy it was simply a burden. Pressed in the front
seat between his parents, he could see only the winged
woman careening off the nose of the car. He was not
allowed to sit on his mother’s lap during the drive—not
because she wouldn’t have it, but because his father
objected to it. So it was only by kneeling on the dove grayseat and looking out the back window that he could see
anything other than the laps, feet, and hands of his parents,
the dashboard, or the silver winged woman poised at the
tip of the Packard. But riding backward made him uneasy.
It was like flying blind, and not knowing where he was going
—just where he had been—troubled him. He did not want to
see trees that he had passed, or houses and children
slipping into the space the automobile had left behind.
Macon Dead’s Packard rolled slowly down Not Doctor
Street, through the rough part of town (later known as the
Blood Bank because blood flowed so freely there), over the
bypass downtown, and headed for the wealthy white
neighborhoods. Some of the black people who saw the car
passing by sighed with good-humored envy at the
classiness, the dignity of it. In 1936 there were very few
among them who lived as well as Macon Dead. Others
watched the family gliding by with a tiny bit of jealousy and
a whole lot of amusement, for Macon’s wide green Packard
belied what they thought a car was for. He never went over
twenty miles an hour, never gunned his engine, never
stayed in first gear for a block or two to give pedestrians a
thrill. He never had a blown tire, never ran out of gas and
needed twelve grinning raggle-tailed boys to help him push
it up a hill or over to a curb. No rope ever held the door to
its frame, and no teen-agers leaped on his running board
for a lift down the street. He hailed no one and no one
hailed him. There was never a sudden braking and backing
up to shout or laugh with a friend. No beer bottles or icecream cones poked from the open windows. Nor did a
baby boy stand up to pee out of them. He never let rain fall
on it if he could help it and he walked to Sonny’s Shop—
taking the car out only on these occasions. What’s more,
they doubted that he had ever taken a woman into the back
seat, because rumor was that he went to “bad houses” or
lay, sometimes, with a slack or lonely female tenant. Other
than the bright and roving eyes of Magdalene called Lena
and First Corinthians, the Packard had no real lived life at
all. So they called it Macon Dead’s hearse.
First Corinthians pulled her fingers through her hair. It
was long, lightweight hair, the color of wet sand. “Are you
going anyplace special, or are we just driving around?” She
kept her eyes on the street, watching the men and women
walking by.
“Careful, Macon. You always take the wrong turn here.”
Ruth spoke softly from the right side of the car.
“Do you want to drive?” Macon asked her.
“You know I don’t drive,” she answered.
“Then let me do it.”
“All right, but don’t blame me if…”
Macon pulled smoothly into the left fork of the road that
led through downtown and into a residential area.“Daddy? Are we going any special place?”
“Honoré,” Macon said.
Magdalene called Lena pushed her stockings farther
down on her legs. “On the lake? What’s out there? There’s
nothing out there, nobody.”
“There’s a beach community out there, Lena. Your father
wants to look at it.” Ruth reasserted herself into the
conversation.
“What for? Those are white people’s houses,” said Lena.
“All of it’s not white people’s houses. Some of it’s
nothing. Just land. Way over on the other side. It could be a
nice summer place for colored people. Beach houses. You
understand what I mean?” Macon glanced at his daughter
through the rear-view mirror.
“Who’s going to live in them? There’s no colored people
who can afford to have two houses,” Lena said.
“Reverend Coles can, and Dr. Singleton,” Corinthians
corrected her.
“And that lawyer—what’s his name?” Ruth looked around
at Corinthians, who ignored her.“And Mary, I suppose.” Lena laughed.
Corinthians stared coldly at her sister. “Daddy wouldn’t
sell property to a barmaid. Daddy, would you let us live next
to a barmaid?”
“She owns that place, Corinthians,” Ruth said.
“I don’t care what she owns. I care about what she is.
Daddy?” Corinthians leaned toward her father for
confirmation.
“You’re going too fast, Macon.” Ruth pressed the toe of
her shoe against the floorboard.
“If you say one more thing to me about the way I drive,
you’re going to walk back home. I mean it.”
Magdalene called Lena sat forward and put her hand on
her mother’s shoulder. Ruth was quiet. The little boy kicked
his feet against the underside of the dashboard.
“Stop that!” Macon told him.
“I have to go to the bathroom,” said his son.
Corinthians held her head. “Oh, Lord.”
“But you went before we left,” said Ruth.“I have to
 go!”
 He was beginning to whine.
“Are you sure?” his mother asked him. He looked at her.
“I guess we better stop,” Ruth said to nobody in particular.
Her eyes grazed the countryside they were entering.
Macon didn’t alter his speed.
“Are
 we
 going to have a summer place, or are you just
selling property?”
“I’m not selling anything. I’m thinking of buying and then
renting,” Macon answered her.
“But are
 we
—”
“I have to go,” said the little boy.
“—going to live there too?”
“Maybe.”
“By ourselves? Who else?” Corinthians was very
interested.
“I can’t tell you that. But in a few years—five or ten—a
whole lot of coloreds will have enough to afford it. A whole
lot. Take my word for it.”
Magdalene called Lena took a deep breath. “Up aheadyou could pull over, Daddy. He might mess up the seat.”
Macon glanced at her in the mirror and slowed down.
“Who’s going to take him?” Ruth fiddled with the door
handle. “Not you,” Macon said to her.
Ruth looked at her husband. She parted her lips but
didn’t say anything.
“Not me,” said Corinthians. “I have on high heels.”
“Come on,” Lena sighed. They left the car, little boy and
big sister, and disappeared into the trees that reared up off
the shoulder of the road.
“You really think there’ll be enough colored people—I
mean nice colored people—in this city to live there?”
“They don’t have to be from this city, Corinthians. People
will drive to a summer house. White people do it all the
time.” Macon drummed his fingers on the steering wheel,
which trembled a little as the car idled.
“Negroes don’t like the water.” Corinthians giggled.
“They’ll like it if they own it,” said Macon. He looked out
the window and saw Magdalene called Lena coming out of
the trees. A large colorful bouquet of flowers was in her
hand, but her face was crumpled in anger. Over her pale-
blue dress dark wet stains spread like fingers.“He wet on me,” she said. “He wet me, Mama.” She was
close to tears.
Ruth clucked her tongue.
Corinthians laughed. “I told you Negroes didn’t like
water.”
He didn’t mean it. It happened before he was through.
She’d stepped away from him to pick flowers, returned, and
at the sound of her footsteps behind him, he’d turned
around before he was through. It was becoming a habit—
this concentration on things behind him. Almost as though
there were no future to be had.
But if the future did not arrive, the present did extend
itself, and the uncomfortable little boy in the Packard went
to school and at twelve met the boy who not only could
liberate him, but could take him to the woman who had as
much to do with his future as she had his past.
Guitar said he knew her. Had even been inside her
house.
“What’s it like in there?” Milkman asked him.
“Shiny,” Guitar answered. “Shiny and brown. With a
smell.”“A bad smell?”
“I don’t know. Her smell. You’ll see.”
All those unbelievable but entirely possible stories about
his father’s sister—the woman his father had forbidden him
to go near—had both of them spellbound. Neither wished to
live one more day without finding out the truth, and they
believed they were the legitimate and natural ones to do so.
After all, Guitar already knew her, and Milkman was her
nephew.
They found her on the front steps sitting wide-legged in a
long-sleeved, long-skirted black dress. Her hair was
wrapped in black too, and from a distance, all they could
really see beneath her face was the bright orange she was
peeling. She was all angles, he remembered later, knees,
mostly, and elbows. One foot pointed east and one pointed
west.
As they came closer and saw the brass box dangling
from her ear, Milkman knew that what with the earring, the
orange, and the angled black cloth, nothing—not the
wisdom of his father nor the caution of the world—could
keep him from her.
Guitar, being older and already in high school, had none
of the reluctance that his young buddy still struggled with,
and was the first one to speak.“Hi.”
The woman looked up. First at Guitar and then at
Milkman.
“What kind of word is that?” Her voice was light but
gravel-sprinkled. Milkman kept on staring at her fingers,
manipulating the orange. Guitar grinned and shrugged. “It
means hello.”
“Then say what you mean.”
“Okay. Hello.”
“That’s better. What you want?”
“Nothin. We just passin by.”
“Look like you standin by.”
“If you don’t want us here, Miss Pilate, we’ll go.” Guitar
spoke softly.
“I ain’t the one with the wants. You the one want
something.”
“We wanna ask you something.” Guitar stopped feigning
indifference. She was too direct, and to keep up with her he
had to pay careful attention to his language.“Ask it.”
“Somebody said you ain’t got no navel.”
“That the question?”
“Yes.”
“Don’t sound like a question. Sound like an answer.
Gimme the question.”
“Do you?”
“Do I what?”
“Do you have a navel?”
“No.”
“What happened to it?”
“Beats me.” She dropped a bright peeling into her lap
and separated an orange section slowly. “Now do I get to
ask a question?”
“Sure.”
“Who’s your little friend?”
“This here’s Milkman.”“Do he talk?” Pilate swallowed a piece of the fruit.
“Yeah. He talk. Say something.” Guitar shoved an elbow
at Milkman without taking his eyes off Pilate.
Milkman took a breath, held it, and said, “Hi.”
Pilate laughed. “You all must be the dumbest unhung
Negroes on earth. What they telling you in them schools?
You say ‘Hi’ to pigs and sheep when you want ’em to move.
When you tell a human being ‘Hi,’ he ought to get up and
knock you down.”
Shame had flooded him. He had expected to feel it, but
not that kind; to be embarrassed, yes, but not that way. She
was the one who was ugly, dirty, poor, and drunk. The
queer aunt whom his sixth-grade schoolmates teased him
about and whom he hated because he felt personally
responsible for her ugliness, her poverty, her dirt, and her
wine.
Instead she was making fun of his school, of his
teachers, of him. And while she looked as poor as
everyone said she was, something was missing from her
eyes that should have confirmed it. Nor was she dirty;
unkempt, yes, but not dirty. The whites of her fingernails
were like ivory. And unless he knew absolutely nothing, this
woman was definitely not drunk. Of course she was
anything but pretty, yet he knew he could have watched herall day: the fingers pulling thread veins from the orange
sections, the berry-black lips that made her look as though
she wore make-up, the earring…. And when she stood up,
he all but gasped. She was as tall as his father, head and
shoulders taller than himself. Her dress wasn’t as long as
he had thought; it came to just below her calf and now he
could see her unlaced men’s shoes and the silvery-brown
skin of her ankles.
She held the peelings precisely as they had fallen in her
lap, and as she walked up the steps she looked as though
she were holding her crotch.
“Your daddy wouldn’t like that. He don’t like dumb
peoples.” Then she looked right at Milkman, one hand
holding the peelings, the other on the doorknob. “I know
your daddy. I know you too.”
Again Guitar spoke up. “You his daddy’s sister?”
“The only one he got. Ain’t but three Deads alive.”
Milkman, who had been unable to get one word out of his
mouth after the foolish “Hi,” heard himself shouting: “I’m a
Dead! My mother’s a Dead! My sisters. You and him ain’t
the only ones!”
Even while he was screaming he wondered why he was
suddenly so defensive—so possessive about his name. He
had always hated that name, all of it, and until he and Guitarbecame friends, he had hated his nickname too. But in
Guitar’s mouth it sounded clever, grown up. Now he was
behaving with this strange woman as though having the
name was a matter of deep personal pride, as though she
had tried to expel him from a very special group, in which
he not only belonged, but had exclusive rights.
In the heartbeat of silence that followed his shouts, Pilate
laughed.
“You all want a soft-boiled egg?” she asked.
The boys looked at each other. She’d changed rhythm on
them. They didn’t want an egg, but they did want to be with
her, to go inside the wine house of this lady who had one
earring, no navel, and looked like a tall black tree.
“No, thanks, but we’d like a drink of water.” Guitar smiled
back at her.
“Well. Step right in.” She opened the door and they
followed her into a large sunny room that looked both
barren and cluttered. A moss-green sack hung from the
ceiling. Candles were stuck in bottles everywhere;
newspaper articles and magazine pictures were nailed to
the walls. But other than a rocking chair, two straight-
backed chairs, a large table, a sink and stove, there was no
furniture. Pervading everything was the odor of pine and
fermenting fruit.“You ought to try one. I know how to do them just right. I
don’t like my whites to move, you know. The yolk I want soft,
but not runny. Want it like wet velvet. How come you don’t
just try one?”
She had dumped the peelings in a large crock, which like
most everything in the house had been made for some
other purpose. Now she stood before the dry sink, pumping
water into a blue-and-white wash basin which she used for
a saucepan.
“Now, the water and the egg have to meet each other on
a kind of equal standing. One can’t get the upper hand over
the other. So the temperature has to be the same for both. I
knock the chill off the water first. Just the chill. I don’t let it
get warm because the egg is room temperature, you see.
Now then, the real secret is right here in the boiling. When
the tiny bubbles come to the surface, when they as big as
peas and just before they get big as marbles. Well, right
then you take the pot off the fire. You don’t just put the fire
out; you take the pot off. Then you put a folded newspaper
over the pot and do one small obligation. Like answering
the door or emptying the bucket and bringing it in off the
front porch. I generally go to the toilet. Not for a long stay,
mind you. Just a short one. If you do all that, you got yourself
a perfect soft-boiled egg.
“I remember the messes I used to make for my father
when I cooked. Your father”—she directed a thumb atMilkman—“he couldn’t cook worth poot. Once I made a
cherry pie for him, or tried to. Macon was a nice boy and
awful good to me. Be nice if you could have known him
then. He would have been a real good friend to you too, like
he was to me.”
Her voice made Milkman think of pebbles. Little round
pebbles that bumped up against each other. Maybe she
was hoarse, or maybe it was the way she said her words,
with both a drawl and a clip. The piny-winy smell was
narcotic, and so was the sun streaming in, strong and
unfettered because there were no curtains or shades at the
windows that were all around the room, two in each of three
walls, one on each side of the door, one on either side of
the sink and the stove, and two on the farther wall. The
fourth wall must back on the bedrooms, Milkman thought.
The pebbly voice, the sun, and the narcotic wine smell
weakened both the boys, and they sat in a pleasant semi-
stupor, listening to her go on and on….
“Hadn’t been for your daddy, I wouldn’t be here today. I
would have died in the womb. And died again in the woods.
Those woods and the dark would have surely killed me. But
he saved me and here I am boiling eggs. Our papa was
dead, you see. They blew him five feet up into the air. He
was sitting on his fence waiting for ‘em, and they snuck up
from behind and blew him five feet into the air. So when we
left Circe’s big house we didn’t have no place to go, so we
just walked around and lived in them woods. Farm country.But Papa came back one day. We didn’t know it was him
at first, cause we both saw him blowed five feet into the air.
We were lost then. And talking about dark! You think dark is
just one color, but it ain’t. There’re five or six kinds of black.
Some silky, some woolly. Some just empty. Some like
fingers. And it don’t stay still. It moves and changes from
one kind of black to another. Saying something is pitch
black is like saying something is green. What kind of
green? Green like my bottles? Green like a grasshopper?
Green like a cucumber, lettuce, or green like the sky is just
before it breaks loose to storm? Well, night black is the
same way. May as well be a rainbow.
“Now, we lost and there was this wind and in front of us
was the back of our daddy. We were some scared children.
Macon kept telling me that the things we was scared of
wasn’t real. What difference do it make if the thing you
scared of is real or not? I remember doing laundry for a
man and his wife once, down in Virginia. The husband
came into the kitchen one afternoon shivering and saying
did I have any coffee made. I asked him what was it that
had grabbed hold of him, he looked so bad. He said he
couldn’t figure it out, but he felt like he was about to fall off a
cliff. Standing right there on that yellow and white and red
linoleum, as level as a flatiron. He was holding on to the
door first, then the chair, trying his best not to fall down. I
opened my mouth to tell him wasn’t no cliff in that kitchen.
Then I remembered how it was being in those woods. I felt
it all over again. So I told the man did he want me to hold onto him so he couldn’t fall. He looked at me with the most
grateful look in the world. ‘Would you?’ he said. I walked
around back of him and locked my fingers in front of his
chest and held on to him. His heart was kicking under his
vest like a mule in heat. But little by little it calmed down.”
“You saved his life,” said Guitar.
“No such thing. His wife come in before it was time to let
go. She asked me what I was doing and I told her.”
“Told her what? What’d you say?”
“The truth. That I was trying to keep him from falling off a
cliff.”
“I bet he wished he had jumped off then. She believe
you? Don’t tell me she believed you.”
“Not right away she didn’t. But soon’s I let go he fell
dead-weight to the floor. Smashed his glasses and
everything. Fell right on his face. And you know what? He
went down so slow. I swear it took three minutes, three
whole minutes to go from a standing upright position to
when he mashed his face on the floor. I don’t know if the cliff
was real or not, but it took him three minutes to fall down it.”
“Was he dead?” asked Guitar.
“Stone dead.”“Who shot your daddy? Did you say somebody shot
him?” Guitar was fascinated, his eyes glittering with lights.
“Five feet into the air…”
“Who?”
“I don’t know who and I don’t know why. I just know what
I’m telling you: what, when, and where.”
“You didn’t say where.” He was insistent.
“I did too. Off a fence.”
“Where was the fence?”
“On our farm.”
Guitar laughed, but his eyes were too shiny to convey
much humor. “Where was the farm?”
“Montour County.”
He gave up on “where.” “Well, when then?”
“When he sat there—on the fence.”
Guitar felt like a frustrated detective. “What year?”
“The year they shot them Irish people down in the streets.Was a good year for guns and gravediggers, I know that.”
Pilate put a barrel lid on the table. Then she lifted the eggs
from the wash basin and began to peel them. Her lips
moved as she played an orange seed around in her mouth.
Only after the eggs were split open, revealing moist
reddish-yellow centers, did she return to her story. “One
morning we woke up when the sun was nearly a quarter
way cross the sky. Bright as anything. And blue. Blue like
the ribbons on my mother’s bonnet. See that streak of sky?”
She pointed out the window. “Right behind them hickories.
See? Right over there.”
They looked and saw the sky stretching back behind the
houses and the trees. “That’s the same color,” she said, as
if she had discovered something important. “Same color as
my mama’s ribbons. I’d know her ribbon color anywhere,
but I don’t know her name. After she died Papa wouldn’t let
anybody say it. Well, before we could get the sand rubbed
out of our eyes and take a good look around, we saw him
sitting there on a stump. Right in the sunlight. We started to
call him but he looked on off, like he was lookin at us and
not lookin at us at the same time. Something in his face
scared us. It was like looking at a face under water. Papa
got up after a while and moved out of the sun on back into
the woods. We just stood there looking at the stump.
Shaking like leaves.”
Pilate scraped the eggshells together into a little heap,
her fingers fanning out over and over again in a gentlesweeping. The boys watched, afraid to say anything lest
they ruin the next part of her story, and afraid to remain
silent lest she not go on with its telling.
“Shaking like leaves,” she murmured, “just like leaves.”
Suddenly she lifted her head and made a sound like a
hoot owl. “Ooo! Here I come!”
Neither Milkman nor Guitar saw or heard anyone
approaching, but Pilate jumped up and ran toward the door.
Before she reached it, a foot kicked it open and Milkman
saw the bent back of a girl. She was dragging a large five-
bushel basket of what looked like brambles, and a woman
was pushing the other side of it, saying, “Watch the doorsill,
baby.”
“I got it,” the girl answered. “Push.”
“About time,” said Pilate. “The light be gone before you
know it.”
“Tommy’s truck broke down,” the girl said, panting. When
the two had managed to get the basket into the room, the
girl stretched her back and turned around, facing them. But
Milkman had no need to see her face; he had already fallen
in love with her behind.
“Hagar.” Pilate looked around the room. “This here’s your
brother, Milkman. And this is his friend. What’s your nameagain, pretty?”
“Guitar.”
“Guitar? You play any?” she asked.
“That ain’t her brother, Mama. They cousins.” The older
woman spoke.
“Same thing.”
“No it ain’t. Is it, baby?”
“No,” said Hagar. “It’s different.”
“See there. It’s different.”
“Well, what is the difference, Reba? You know so much.”
Reba looked at the ceiling. “A brother is a brother if you
both got the same mother or if you both—”
Pilate interrupted her. “I mean what’s the difference in the
way you act toward ’em? Don’t you have to act the same
way to both?”
“That’s not the point, Mama.”
“Shut up, Reba. I’m talking to Hagar.”
“Yes, Mama. You treat them both the same.”“Then why they got two words for it ‘stead of one, if they
ain’t no difference?” Reba put her hands on her hips and
opened her eyes wide.
“Pull that rocker over here,” said Pilate. “You boys have
to give up your seats unless you gonna help.”
The women circled the basket, which was full of
blackberries still on their short, thorny branches.
“What we have to do?” Guitar asked.
“Get them little berries off them hateful branches without
popping’em. Reba, get that other crock.”
Hagar looked around, all eyes and hair. “Why don’t we
pull a bed out the back room? Then we can all sit down.”
“Floor’s good enough for me,” said Pilate, and she
squatted down on her haunches and lifted a branch gently
from the basket. “This all you got?”
“No.” Reba was side-rolling a huge crock. “Two more
outside.”
“Better bring them in. Draw too many flies out there.”
Hagar started for the door and motioned to Milkman.
“Come on, brother. You can help.”Milkman jumped up, knocking his chair backward, and
trotted after Hagar. She was, it seemed to him, as pretty a
girl as he’d ever seen. She was much much older than he
was. She must be as old as Guitar, maybe even seventeen.
He seemed to be floating. More alive than he’d ever been,
and floating. Together he and Hagar dragged two baskets
up the porch stairs and into the house. She was as strong
and muscular as he was.
“Careful, Guitar. Go slow. You keep on busting ’em.”
“Leave him alone, Reba. He got to get the feel first. I
asked you did you play any. That why they call you Guitar?”
“Not cause I do play. Because I wanted to. When I was
real little. So they tell me.”
“Where’d you ever see a guitar?”
“It was a contest, in a store down home in Florida. I saw it
when my mother took me downtown with her. I was just a
baby. It was one of those things where you guess how many
beans in the big glass jar and you win a guitar. I cried for it,
they said. And always asked about it.”
“You should of called Reba. She’d get it for you.”
“No, you couldn’t buy it. You had to give the number of
jellybeans.”“I heard you. Reba would of known how many. Reba wins
things. She ain’t never lost nothing.”
“Really?” Guitar smiled, but he was doubtful. “She lucky?”
“Sure I’m lucky.” Reba grinned. “People come from
everywhere to get me to stand in for ’em at drawings and
give them numbers to play. It works pretty well for them, and
it always works for me. I win everything I try to win and lots
of things I don’t even try to win.”
“Got to where won’t nobody sell her a raffle ticket. They
just want her to hold theirs.”
“See this?” Reba put her hand down in the top of her
dress and pulled out a diamond ring attached to a string. “I
won this last year. I was the … what was it,
 Mama?”
“Five hundred thousandth.”
“Five hundred…no it wasn’t. That ain’t what they said.”
“Half a million is what they said.”
“That’s right. The half a millionth person to walk into
Sears and Roebuck.” Her laughter was gay and proud.
“They didn’t want to give it to her,” said Hagar, “cause
she looked so bad.”Guitar was astonished. “I remember that contest, but I
don’t remember hearing nothing ’bout no colored person
winning it.” Guitar, a habitual street roamer, believed he
knew every public thing going on in the city.
“Nobody did. They had picture-taking people and
everything waiting for the next person to walk in the door.
But they never did put my picture in the paper. Me and
Mama looked, too, didn’t we?” She glanced at Pilate for
confirmation and went on. “But they put the picture of the
man who won second prize in. He won a war bond. He was
white.”
“Second prize?” Guitar asked. “What kind of ‘second
prize’? Either you the half-millionth person or you ain’t.
Can’t be no next-to-the-half-millionth.”
“Can if the winner is Reba,” Hagar said. “The only reason
they got a second was cause she was the first. And the only
reason they gave it to her was because of them cameras.”
“Tell ’em why you was in Sears, Reba.”
“Looking for a toilet.” Reba threw her head back to let the
laughter escape. Her hands were stained with blackberry
juice, and when she wiped the tears from her eyes she
streaked the purple from her nose to her cheekbone. Much
lighter than Pilate or Hagar, Reba had the simple eyes of
an infant. All of them had a guileless look about them, butcomplication and something more lurked behind Pilate’s
and Hagar’s faces. Only Reba, with her light pimply skin
and deferential manner, looked as though her simplicity
might also be vacuousness.
“Ain’t but two toilets downtown they let colored in:
Mayflower Restaurant and Sears. Sears was closer. Good
thing nature wasn’t in a hurry. They kept me there fifteen
minutes gettin my name and address to send the diamond
over to me. But I wouldn’t let ’em send it to me. I kept
asking them, Is this a real contest? I don’t believe you.”
“It was worth a diamond ring to get you out of there.
Drawing a crowd and getting ready to draw flies,” said
Hagar.
“What’re you going to do with the ring?” Milkman asked
her.
“Wear it. Seldom I win something I like.”
“Everything she win, she give away,” Hagar said.
“To a man,” said Pilate.
“She don’t never keep none of it….”
“That’s what she want to win—a man….”
“Worse’n Santa Claus….”“Funny kind of luck ain’t no luck at all….”
“
He
 comes just once a year….”
Hagar and Pilate pulled the conversation apart, each
yanking out some thread of comment more to herself than
to Milkman or Guitar—or even Reba, who had dropped her
ring back inside her dress and was smiling sweetly, and
deftly separating the royal-purple berries from their twigs.
Milkman was five feet seven then but it was the first time
in his life that he remembered being completely happy. He
was with his friend, an older boy—wise and kind and
fearless. He was sitting comfortably in the notorious wine
house; he was surrounded by women who seemed to enjoy
him and who laughed out loud. And he was in love. No
wonder his father was afraid of them.
“When will this wine be ready?” he asked.
“This batch? Few weeks,” Pilate said.
“You gonna let us have some?” Guitar smiled.
“Sure. You want some now? Plenty wine in the cellar.”
“I don’t want that. I want some of this. Some of the wine I
made.”
“You think you made this?” Pilate laughed at him. “Youthink this all there is to it? Picking a few berries?”
“Oh.” Guitar scratched his head. “I forgot. We got to mash
them in our bare feet.”
“Feet? Feet?” Pilate was outraged. “Who makes wine
with they feet?”
“Might taste good, Mama,” said Hagar.
“Couldn’t taste no worse,” Reba said.
“Your wine any good, Pilate?” asked Guitar.
“Couldn’t tell you.”
“Why not?”
“Never tasted it.”
Milkman laughed. “’t even taste?”
“Folks don’t buy it for the taste. Buy it to get drunk.”
Reba nodded. “Used to anyway. Ain’t buying nothing
now.”
“Don’t nobody want no cheap home brew. The
Depression’s over,” Hagar said. “Everybody got work now.
They can afford to buy Four Roses.”“Plenty still buy,” Pilate told her.
“Where you get the sugar for it?” Guitar asked.
“Black market,” said Reba.
“What ‘plenty’? Tell the truth, Mama. If Reba hadn’t won
that hundred pounds of groceries, we’d have starved last
winter.”
“Would not.” Pilate put a fresh piece of twig in her mouth.
“We
 would
 have.”
“Hagar, don’t contradict your mama,” Reba whispered.
“Who was gonna feed us?” Hagar was insistent. “Mama
can go for months without food. Like a lizard.”
“Lizard live that long without food?” asked Reba.
“Girl, ain’t nobody gonna let you starve. You ever had a
hungry day?” Pilate asked her granddaughter.
“Course she ain’t,” said her mother.
Hagar tossed a branch to the heap on the floor and
rubbed her fingers. The tips were colored a deep red.
“Some of my days were hungry ones.”
With the quickness of birds, the heads of Pilate andReba shot up. They peered at Hagar, then exchanged
looks.
“Baby?” Reba’s voice was soft. “You been hungry, baby?
Why didn’t you say so?” Reba looked hurt. “We get you
anything you want, baby. Anything. You
 been
 knowing that.”
Pilate spit her twig into the palm of her hand. Her face
went still. Without those moving lips her face was like a
mask. It seemed to Milkman that somebody had just
clicked off a light. He looked at the faces of the women.
Reba’s had crumpled. Tears were streaming down her
cheeks. Pilate’s face was still as death, but alert as though
waiting for some signal. Hagar’s profile was hidden by her
hair. She leaned forward, her elbows on her thighs, rubbing
fingers that looked bloodstained in the lessening light. Her
nails were very very long.
The quiet held. Even Guitar didn’t dare break it.
Then Pilate spoke. “Reba. She don’t mean food.”
Realization swept slowly across Reba’s face, but she
didn’t answer. Pilate began to hum as she returned to
plucking the berries. After a moment, Reba joined her, and
they hummed together in perfect harmony until Pilate took
the lead:O Sugarman don’t leave me here
Cotton balls to choke me
O Sugarman don’t leave me here
Buckra’s arms to yoke me….
When the two women got to the chorus, Hagar raised her
head and sang too.
Sugarman done fly away
Sugarman done gone
Sugarman cut across the sky
Sugarman gone home.
Milkman could hardly breathe. Hagar’s voice scooped up
what little pieces of heart he had left to call his own. When
he thought he was going to faint from the weight of what he
was feeling, he risked a glance at his friend and saw the
setting sun gilding Guitar’s eyes, putting into shadow a slow
smile of recognition.
Delicious as the day turned out to be for Milkman, it waseven more so because it included secrecy and defiance,
both of which dissipated within an hour of his father’s return.
Freddie had let Macon Dead know that his son had spent
the afternoon “drinking in the wine house.”
“He’s lying! We didn’t drink nothing. Nothing. Guitar didn’t
even get the glass of water he asked for.”
“Freddie never lies. He misrepresents, but he never lies.”
“He lied to you.”
“About the wine-drinking? Maybe. But not about you
being there, huh?”
“No, sir. Not about that.” Milkman softened his tone a bit,
but succeeded in keeping the edge of defiance in his
voice.
“Now, what were your instructions from me?”
“You told me to stay away from there. To stay away from
Pilate.”
“Right.”
“But you never told me why. They’re our cousins. She’s
your own sister.”
“And you’re my own son. And you will do what I tell you todo. With or without explanations. As long as your feet are
under my table, you’ll do in this house what you are told.”
At fifty-two, Macon Dead was as imposing a man as he
had been at forty-two, when Milkman thought he was the
biggest thing in the world. Bigger even than the house they
lived in. But today he had seen a woman who was just as
tall and who had made him feel tall too.
“I know I’m the youngest one in this family, but I ain’t no
baby. You treat me like I was a baby. You keep saying you
don’t have to explain nothing to me. How do you think that
makes me feel? Like a baby, that’s what. Like a twelve-
year-old baby!”
“Don’t you raise your voice to me.”
“Is that the way your father treated you when you were
twelve?”
“Watch your mouth!” Macon roared. He took his hands
out of his pockets but didn’t know what to do with them. He
was momentarily confused. His son’s question had shifted
the scenery. He was seeing himself at twelve, standing in
Milkman’s shoes and feeling what he himself had felt for his
own father. The numbness that had settled on him when he
saw the man he loved and admired fall off the fence;
something wild ran through him when he watched the body
twitching in the dirt. His father had sat for five nights on asplit-rail fence cradling a shotgun and in the end died
protecting his property. Was that what this boy felt for him?
Maybe it was time to tell him things.
“Well, did he?”
“I worked right alongside my father. Right alongside him.
From the time I was four or five we worked together. Just
the two of us. Our mother was dead. Died when Pilate was
born. Pilate was just a baby. She stayed over at another
farm in the daytime. I carried her over there myself in my
arms every morning. Then I’d go back across the fields and
meet my father. We’d hitch President Lincoln to the plow
and…That’s what we called her: President Lincoln. Papa
said Lincoln was a good plow hand before he was
President and you shouldn’t take a good plow hand away
from his work. He called our farm Lincoln’s Heaven. It was a
little bit a place. But it looked big to me then. I know now it
must a been a little bit a place, maybe a hundred and fifty
acres. We tilled fifty. About eighty of it was woods. Must of
been a fortune in oak and pine; maybe that’s what they
wanted—the lumber, the oak and the pine. We had a pond
that was four acres. And a stream, full of fish. Right down in
the heart of a valley. Prettiest mountain you ever saw,
Montour Ridge. We lived in Montour County. Just north of
the Susquehanna. We had a four-stall hog pen. The big
barn was forty feet by a hundred and forty—hip-roofed too.
And all around in the mountains was deer and wild turkey.
You ain’t tasted nothing till you taste wild turkey the wayPapa cooked it. He’d burn it real fast in the fire. Burn it
black all over. That sealed it. Sealed the juices in. Then
he’d let it roast on a spit for twenty-four hours. When you cut
the black burnt part off, the meat underneath was tender,
sweet, juicy. And we had fruit trees. Apple, cherry. Pilate
tried to make me a cherry pie once.”
Macon paused and let the smile come on. He had not
said any of this for years. Had not even reminisced much
about it recently. When he was first married he used to talk
about Lincoln’s Heaven to Ruth. Sitting on the porch swing
in the dark, he would re-create the land that was to have
been his. Or when he was just starting out in the business of
buying houses, he would lounge around the barbershop
and swap stories with the men there. But for years he
hadn’t had that kind of time, or interest. But now he was
doing it again, with his son, and every detail of that land
was clear in his mind: the well, the apple orchard, President
Lincoln; her foal, Mary Todd; Ulysses S. Grant, their cow;
General Lee, their hog. That was the way he knew what
history he remembered. His father couldn’t read, couldn’t
write; knew only what he saw and heard tell of. But he had
etched in Macon’s mind certain historical figures, and as a
boy in school, Macon thought of the personalities of his
horse, his hog, when he read about these people. His
father may have called their plow horse President Lincoln
as a joke, but Macon always thought of Lincoln with
fondness since he had loved him first as a strong, steady,
gentle, and obedient horse. He even liked General Lee, forone spring they slaughtered him and ate the best pork
outside Virginia, “from the butt to the smoked ham to the
ribs to the sausage to the jowl to the feet to the tail to the
head cheese”—for eight months. And there was cracklin in
November.
“General Lee was all right by me,” he told Milkman,
smiling. “Finest general I ever knew. Even his balls was
tasty. Circe made up the best pot of maws she ever
cooked. Huh! I’d forgotten that woman’s name. That was it,
Circe. Worked at a big farm some white people owned in
Danville, Pennsylvania. Funny how things get away from
you. For years you can’t remember nothing. Then just like
that, it all comes back to you. Had a dog run, they did. That
was the big sport back then. Dog races. White people did
love their dogs. Kill a nigger and comb their hair at the
same time. But I’ve seen grown white men cry about their
dogs.”
His voice sounded different to Milkman. Less hard, and
his speech was different. More southern and comfortable
and soft. Milkman spoke softly too. “Pilate said somebody
shot your father. Five feet into the air.”
“Took him sixteen years to get that farm to where it was
paying. It’s all dairy country up there now. Then it wasn’t.
Then it was…nice.”
“Who shot him, Daddy?”Macon focused his eyes on his son. “Papa couldn’t read,
couldn’t even sign his name. Had a mark he used. They
tricked him. He signed something, I don’t know what, and
they told him they owned his property. He never read
nothing. I tried to teach him, but he said he couldn’t
remember those little marks from one day to the next.
Wrote one word in his life—Pilate’s name; copied it out of
the Bible. That’s what she got folded up in that earring. He
should have let me teach him. Everything bad that ever
happened to him happened because he couldn’t read. Got
his name messed up cause he couldn’t read.”
“His name? How?”
“When freedom came. All the colored people in the state
had to register with the Freedmen’s Bureau.”
“Your father was a slave?”
“What kind of foolish question is that? Course he was.
Who hadn’t been in 1869? They all had to register. Free
and not free. Free and used-to-be-slaves. Papa was in his
teens and went to sign up, but the man behind the desk
was drunk. He asked Papa where he was born. Papa said
Macon. Then he asked him who his father was. Papa said,
‘He’s dead.’ Asked him who owned him, Papa said, ‘I’m
free.’ Well, the Yankee wrote it all down, but in the wrong
spaces. Had him born in Dunfrie, wherever the hell that is,
and in the space for his name the fool wrote, ‘Dead’comma ‘Macon.’ But Papa couldn’t read so he never found
out what he was registered as till Mama told him. They met
on a wagon going North. Started talking about one thing
and another, told her about being a freedman and showed
off his papers to her. When she looked at his paper she
read him out what it said.”
“He didn’t have to keep the name, did he? He could have
used his real name, couldn’t he?”
“Mama liked it. Liked the name. Said it was new and
would wipe out the past. Wipe it all out.”
“What was his real name?”
“I don’t remember my mother too well. She died when I
was four. Light-skinned, pretty. Looked like a white woman
to me. Me and Pilate don’t take nothing after her. If you ever
have a doubt we from Africa, look at Pilate. She look just
like Papa and he looked like all them pictures you ever see
of Africans. A Pennsylvania African. Acted like one too.
Close his face up like a door.”
“I saw Pilate’s face like that.” Milkman felt close and
confidential now that his father had talked to him in a
relaxed and intimate way.
“I haven’t changed my mind, Macon. I don’t want you over
there.”“Why? You still haven’t said why.”
“Just listen to what I say. That woman’s no good. She’s a
snake, and can charm you like a snake, but still a snake.”
“You talking about your own sister, the one you carried in
your arms to the fields every morning.”
“That was a long time ago. You seen her. What she look
like to you? Somebody nice? Somebody normal?”
“Well, she…”
“Or somebody cut your throat?”
“She didn’t look like that, Daddy.”
“Well she
 is
 like that.”
“What’d she do?”
“It ain’t what she did; it’s what she is.”
“What is she?”
“A snake, I told you. Ever hear the story about the snake?
The man who saw a little baby snake on the ground? Well,
the man saw this baby snake bleeding and hurt. Lying there
in the dirt. And the man felt sorry for it and picked it up and
put it in his basket and took it home. And he fed it and tookcare of it till it was big and strong. Fed it the same thing he
ate. Then one day, the snake turned on him and bit him.
Stuck his poison tongue right in the man’s heart. And while
he was laying there dying, he turned to the snake and
asked him, ‘What’d you do that for?’ He said, ‘Didn’t I take
good care of you? Didn’t I save your life?’ The snake said,
‘Yes.’ ‘Then what’d you do it for? What’d you kill me for?’
Know what the snake said? Said, ‘But you knew I was a
snake, didn’t you?’ Now, I mean for you to stay out of that
wine house and as far away from Pilate as you can.”
Milkman lowered his head. His father had explained
nothing to him.
“Boy, you got better things to do with your time. Besides,
it’s time you started learning how to work. You start
Monday. After school come to my office; work a couple of
hours there and learn what’s real. Pilate can’t teach you a
thing you can use in this world. Maybe the next, but not this
one. Let me tell you right now the one important thing you’ll
ever need to know: Own things. And let the things you own
own other things. Then you’ll own yourself and other people
too. Starting Monday, I’m going to teach you how.”Chapter 3
Life improved for Milkman enormously after he began
working for Macon. Contrary to what his father hoped, there
was more time to visit the wine house. Running errands for
Macon’s rent houses gave him leave to be in Southside
and get to know the people Guitar knew so well. Milkman
was young and he was friendly—just the opposite of his
father—and the tenants felt at ease enough with him to
tease him, feed him, confide in him. But it was hard to see
much of Guitar. Saturdays were the only days he was
certain to find him. If Milkman got up early enough on
Saturday morning, he could catch his friend before Guitar
went roaming the streets and before he himself had to help
Macon collect rents. But there were days in the week when
they agreed to skip school and hang out, and on one of
those days Guitar took him to Feather’s pool hall on Tenth
Street, right in the middle of the Blood Bank area.
It was eleven o’clock in the morning when Guitar pushed
open the door and shouted, “Hey, Feather! Give us a
couple of Red Caps.”
Feather, a short squat man with sparse but curly hair,
looked up at Guitar, then at Milkman, and frowned.
“Get him out of here.”Guitar stopped short and followed the little man’s gaze to
Milkman’s face and back again. The half-dozen men there
playing pool turned around at the sound of Feather’s voice.
Three of them were air force pilots, part of the 332nd
Fighter Group. Their beautiful hats and gorgeous leather
jackets were carefully arranged on chairs. Their hair was
cut close to the skull; their shirt cuffs were turned neatly
back on their forearms; their white scarves hung in snowy
rectangles from their hip pockets. Silver chains glistened at
their necks and they looked faintly amused as they worked
chalk into the tips of their cues.
Guitar’s face shone with embarrassment. “He’s with me,”
he said.
“I said get him outta here.”
“Come on, Feather, he’s my friend.”
“He’s Macon Dead’s boy, ain’t he?”
“So what”
“So get him outta here.”
“He can’t help who his daddy is.” Guitar had his voice
under control.
“Neither can I. Out.”“What his daddy do to you?”
“Nothing yet. That’s why I want him outta here.”
“He ain’t like his daddy.”
“He ain’t got to be like him—
from
 him is enough.”
“I’ll be responsible for—”
“Stop messing with me, Guitar. Get him out. He ain’t old
enough to have wet dreams.”
The pilots laughed and a man in a gray straw hat with a
white band said, “Aw, let the boy stay, Feather.”
“You shut your mouth. I’m running this.”
“What harm can he do? A twelve-year-old kid.” He smiled
at Milkman, who stopped himself from saying, No, thirteen.
“But it ain’t your problem, is it?” asked Feather. “His
daddy ain’t your landlord, is he, and you ain’t got no
operating license to hang on to either. You ain’t got
nothing….”
Feather turned on the man with the white hatband the
same acid manner he’d used with the boys. Guitar took the
opportunity offered by Feather’s new target to shoot his
hand out like a double-edged hatchet slamming into a tree,and shout, “Later for you, man. Come on. Let’s shake this
place.” His voice now was loud and deep—loud enough
and deep enough for two. Milkman slid his hands into his
back pockets and followed his friend to the door. He
stretched his neck a little to match the chilly height he
hoped the soldiers had seen in his eyes.
Silently they ambled down Tenth Street until they reached
a stone bench that jutted from the sidewalk near the curb.
They stopped there and sat down, their backs to the eyes
of two men in white smocks who were watching them. One
of the men leaned in the doorway of a barbershop. The
other sat in a chair tilted back to the plate-glass window of
the shop. They were the owners of the barbershop,
Railroad Tommy and Hospital Tommy. Neither boy spoke,
not to the men nor to each other. They sat and watched the
traffic go by.
“Have all the halls of academe crumbled, Guitar?”
Hospital Tommy spoke from his chair. His eyes were milky,
like those of very old people, but the rest of him was firm,
lithe, and young-looking. His tone was casual but
suggested authority nonetheless.
“No, sir.” Guitar answered him over his shoulder.
“Then what, pray, are you doing out here in the streets at
this time of day?”Guitar shrugged. “We just took a day off, Mr. Tommy.”
“And your companion? Is he on sabbatical too?”
Guitar nodded. Hospital Tommy talked like an
encyclopedia and Guitar had to guess at most of his words.
Milkman kept looking at the cars going by.
“Neither one of you appears to be having much fun on
your holiday. You could have stayed in the halls of academe
and looked evil.”
Guitar fished for a cigarette and offered one to Milkman.
“Feather made me mad is all.”
“Feather?”
“Yeah. He wouldn’t let us in. I go in there all the time. All
the time and he don’t say nothing. But today he throws us
out. Said my friend here is too young. Can you beat that?
Feather? Worrying about somebody’s age?”
“I didn’t know Feather had so much as a brain cell to
worry with.”
“He don’t. Just showing off is all. He wouldn’t even let me
have a bottle of beer.”
Railroad Tommy laughed softly from the doorway. “Is that
all? He wouldn’t let you have a beer?” He rubbed the backof his neck and then crooked a finger at Guitar. “Come over
here, boy, and let me tell you about some other stuff you are
not going to have. Come on over here.”
Reluctantly they stood up and sidled closer to the
laughing man.
“You think that’s something? Not having a beer? Well, let
me ask you something. You ever stood stock still in the
galley of the Baltimore and Ohio dining car in the middle of
the night when the kitchen closed down and everything’s
neat and ready for the next day? And the engine’s
highballing down the track and three of your buddies is
waiting for you with a brand-new deck of cards?”
Guitar shook his head. “No, I never…”
“That’s right, you never. And you never going to. That’s
one more thrill you not going to have, let alone a bottle of
beer.”
Guitar smiled. “Mr. Tommy,” he began, but Tommy cut
him off.
“You ever pull fourteen days straight and come home to a
sweet woman, clean sheets, and a fifth of Wild Turkey?
Eh?” He looked at Milkman. “Did you?”
Milkman smiled and said, “No, sir.”“No? Well, don’t look forward to it, cause you not going to
have that either.”
Hospital Tommy drew a pinfeather toothpick from under
his smock. “Don’t tease the boy, Tommy.”
“Who’s teasing? I’m telling him the truth. He ain’t going to
have it. Neither one of ’em going to have it. And I’ll tell you
something else you not going to have. You not going to
have no private coach with four red velvet chairs that swivel
around in one place whenever you want ’em to. No. And
you not going to have your own special toilet and your own
special-made eight-foot bed either. And a valet and a cook
and a secretary to travel with you and do everything you
say. Everything: get the right temperature in your hot-water
bottle and make sure the smoking tobacco in the silver
humidor is fresh each and
 every
 day. That’s something
else you not going to have. You ever have five thousand
dollars of cold cash money in your pocket and walk into a
bank and tell the bank man you want such and such a
house on such and such a street and he sell it to you right
then? Well, you won’t ever have it. And you not going to
have a governor’s mansion, or eight thousand acres of
timber to sell. And you not going to have no ship under your
command to sail on, no train to run, and you can join the
332nd if you want to and shoot down a thousand German
planes all by yourself and land in Hitler’s backyard and whip
him with your own hands, but you never going to have four
stars on your shirt front, or even three. And you not going tohave no breakfast tray brought in to you early in the morning
with a red rose on it and two warm croissants and a cup of
hot chocolate. Nope. Never. And no pheasant buried in
coconut leaves for twenty days and stuffed with wild rice
and cooked over a wood fire so tender and delicate it
make you cry. And no Rothschild ‘29 or even Beaujolais to
go with it.”
A few men passing by stopped to listen to Tommy’s
lecture. “What’s going on?” they asked Hospital Tommy.
“Feather refused them a beer,” he said. The men
laughed.
“And
 no
 baked Alaska!” Railroad Tommy went on.
“None! You never going to have that.”
“No baked Alaska?” Guitar opened his eyes wide with
horror and grabbed his throat. “You breaking my heart!”
“Well, now. That’s something you will have—a broken
heart.” Railroad Tommy’s eyes softened, but the merriment
in them died suddenly. “And folly. A whole lot of folly. You
can count on it.”
“Mr. Tommy, suh,” Guitar sang in mock humility, “we just
wanted a bottle of beer is all.”
“Yeah,” said Tommy. “Yeah, well, welcome aboard.”“What’s a baked Alaska?” They left the Tommys just as
they had found them and continued down Tenth Street.
“Something sweet,” answered Guitar. “A dessert.”
“Taste good?”
“I don’t know. I can’t eat sweets.”
“You can’t?” Milkman was amazed. “Why not?”
“Makes me sick.”
“You don’t like nothing sweet?”
“Fruit, but nothing with sugar. Candy, cake, stuff like that. I
don’t even like to smell it. Makes me want to throw up.”
Milkman searched for a physical cause. He wasn’t sure
he trusted anybody who didn’t like sweets. “You must have
sugar diabetes.”
“You don’t get sugar diabetes from not eating sugar. You
get it from eating too much sugar.”
“Then what is it, then?”
“I don’t know. It makes me think of dead people. And
white people. And I start to puke.”
“Dead people?”“Yeah. And white people.”
“I don’t get it.”
Guitar said nothing, so Milkman continued, “How long
you been like that?”
“Since I was little. Since my father got sliced up in a
sawmill and his boss came by and gave us kids some
candy. Divinity. A big sack of divinity. His wife made it
special for us. It’s sweet, divinity is. Sweeter than syrup.
Real sweet. Sweeter than…” He stopped walking and
wiped from his forehead the beads of sweat that were
collecting there. His eyes paled and wavered. He spit on
the sidewalk. “Ho—hold it,” he whispered, and stepped into
a space between a fried-fish restaurant and Lilly’s Beauty
Parlor.
Milkman waited on the sidewalk, staring at the curtained
window of the beauty shop. Beauty shops always had
curtains or shades up. Barbershops didn’t. The women
didn’t want anybody on the street to be able to see them
getting their hair done. They were ashamed.
When Guitar emerged, his eyes were teary from the
effort of dry heaving. “Come on,” he said. “Let’s get us
some weed. That’s one thing I can have.”
By the time Milkman was fourteen he had noticed thatone of his legs was shorter than the other. When he stood
barefoot and straight as a pole, his left foot was about half
an inch off the floor. So he never stood straight; he
slouched or leaned or stood with a hip thrown out, and he
never told anybody about it—ever. When Lena said,
“Mama, what is he walking like
 that
 for?” he said, “I’ll walk
any way I want to, including over your ugly face.” Ruth said,
“Be quiet, you two. It’s just growing pains, Lena.” Milkman
knew better. It wasn’t a limp—not at all—just the suggestion
of one, but it looked like an affected walk, the strut of a very
young man trying to appear more sophisticated than he
was. It bothered him and he acquired movements and
habits to disguise what to him was a burning defect. He sat
with his left ankle on his right knee, never the other way
around. And he danced each new dance with a curious
stiff-legged step that the girls loved and other boys
eventually copied. The deformity was mostly in his mind.
Mostly, but not completely, for he did have shooting pains in
that leg after several hours on a basketball court. He
favored it, believed it was polio, and felt secretly connected
to the late President Roosevelt for that reason. Even when
everybody was raving about Truman because he had set
up a Committee on Civil Rights, Milkman secretly preferred
FDR and felt very very close to him. Closer, in fact, to him
than to his own father, for Macon had no imperfection and
age seemed to strengthen him. Milkman feared his father,
respected him, but knew, because of the leg, that he could
never emulate him. So he differed from him as much as he
dared. Macon was clean-shaven; Milkman was desperatefor a mustache. Macon wore bow ties; Milkman wore four-
in-hands. Macon didn’t part his hair; Milkman had a part
shaved into his. Macon hated tobacco; Milkman tried to put
a cigarette in his mouth every fifteen minutes. Macon
hoarded his money; Milkman gave his away. But he
couldn’t help sharing with Macon his love of good shoes
and fine thin socks. And he did try, as his father’s
employee, to do the work the way Macon wanted it done.
Macon was delighted. His son belonged to him now and
not to Ruth, and he was relieved at not having to walk all
over town like a peddler collecting rents. It made his
business more dignified, and he had time to think, to plan,
to visit the bank men, to read the public notices, auctions,
to find out what plots were going for taxes, unclaimed heirs’
property, where roads were being built, what supermarkets,
schools; and who was trying to sell what to the government
for the housing projects that were going to be built. The
quickie townlets that were springing up around war plants.
He knew as a Negro he wasn’t going to get a big slice of
the pie. But there were properties nobody wanted yet, or
little edges of property somebody didn’t want Jews to have,
or Catholics to have, or properties nobody knew were of
any value yet. There was quite a bit of pie filling oozing
around the edge of the crust in 1945. Filling that could be
his. Everything had improved for Macon Dead during the
war. Except Ruth. And years later when the war was over
and that pie filling had spilled over into his very lap, had
stickied his hands and weighed his stomach down into asagging paunch, he still wished he had strangled her back
in 1921. She hadn’t stopped spending occasional nights
out of the house, but she was fifty years old now and what
lover could she have kept so long? What lover could there
be that even Freddie didn’t know about? Macon decided it
was of no importance, and less often did he get angry
enough to slap her. Particularly after the final time, which
became final because his son jumped up and knocked him
back into the radiator.
Milkman was twenty-two then and since he had been
fucking for six years, some of them with the same woman,
he’d begun to see his mother in a new light. She was no
longer the person who worried him about galoshes and
colds and food, who stood in the way of most of the little
pleasures he could take at home because they all involved
some form of dirt, noise, or disarray. Now he saw her as a
frail woman content to do tiny things; to grow and cultivate
small life that would not hurt her if it died: rhododendron,
goldfish, dahlias, geraniums, imperial tulips. Because
these little lives did die. The goldfish floated to the top of
the water and when she tapped the side of the bowl with
her fingernail they did not flash away in a lightning arc of
terror. The rhododendron leaves grew wide and green and
when their color was at its deepest and waxiest, they
suddenly surrendered it and lapsed into limp yellow hearts.
In a way she was jealous of death. Inside all that grief she
felt when the doctor died, there had been a bit of pique too,
as though he had chosen a more interesting subject thanlife—a more provocative companion than she was—and
had deliberately followed death when it beckoned. She was
fierce in the presence of death, heroic even, as she was at
no other time. Its threat gave her direction, clarity, audacity.
Regardless of what Macon had done, she’d always
suspected that the doctor didn’t have to die if he hadn’t
wanted to. And it may have been that suspicion of personal
failure and rejection (plus a smidgen of revenge against
Macon) that made her lead her husband down paths from
which there was no exit save violence. Lena thought
Macon’s rages unaccountable. But Corinthians began to
see a plan. To see how her mother had learned to bring her
husband to a point, not of power (a nine-year-old girl could
slap Ruth and get away with it), but of helplessness. She
would begin by describing some incident in which she was
a sort of honest buffoon. It began as a piece of pleasant
dinner conversation, harmless on the surface because no
one at the table was required to share her embarrassment;
but all were able to admire her honesty and to laugh at her
ignorance.
She had gone to the wedding of Mrs. Djvorak’s
granddaughter. Anna Djvorak was an old Hungarian
woman who had been one of her father’s patients. He’d
had many working-class white patients and some middle-
class white women who thought he was handsome. Anna
Djvorak was convinced that the doctor had miraculously
saved her son’s life by not sending him to the tuberculosis
sanatorium back in 1903. Almost everybody who did go tothe “san,” as they called it, died in it. Anna didn’t know that
the doctor had no practicing privileges there, just as he had
none at Mercy. Nor did she know that the cure for
tuberculosis in 1903 was precisely the one most
detrimental to the patients. All she knew was that the doctor
had prescribed a certain diet, hours of rest to be rigidly
adhered to, and cod-liver oil twice a day. The boy survived.
It was natural that she would want the miracle doctor’s
daughter at the wedding of this son’s youngest daughter.
Ruth went and when the congregation went to the altar to
receive the host, she went also. Kneeling there with her
head bowed, she was not aware that the priest was left with
the choice of placing the wafer on her hat or skipping her.
He knew immediately that she was not Catholic since she
did not raise her head at his words and push out her tongue
for the wafer to be carefully placed there.
“Corpus Domini Nostri Jesu Christi,” said the priest, and
then, to her, a sharp whisper: “Ssss. Raise your head!” She
looked up, saw the wafer and the acolyte holding a little
silver tray under it. “Corpus Domini Nostri Jesu Christi
custodiat animam tuam…” The priest held the host toward
her and she opened her mouth.
Later, at the reception, the priest asked her point-blank
whether she was Catholic.
“No. I’m Methodist,” she said.“I see,” he said. “Well, the sacraments of the Church are
reserved for—” Just then old Mrs. Djvorak interrupted him.
“Father,” she said, “I want you to meet one of my dearest
friends. Dr. Foster’s daughter. Her father saved Ricky’s life.
Ricky wouldn’t be here today if…”
Father Padrew smiled and shook Ruth’s hand. “Very
pleased to meet you, Miss Foster.”
It was a simple occurrence, elaborately told. Lena
listened and experienced each phrase of her mother’s
emotion from religious ecstasy to innocent confidence to
embarrassment. Corinthians listened analytically,
expectantly—wondering how her mother would develop this
anecdote into a situation in which Macon would either lash
out at her verbally or hit her. Milkman was only half listening.
“‘Are you Catholic?’ he asked me. Well, I was
embarrassed for a minute, but then I said, ‘No. I’m
Methodist.’ And he started to tell me that only Catholics
could take communion in a Catholic church. Well, I never
heard of that. Anybody can take communion, I thought. At
our church anybody can come up on the first Sunday. Well,
before he could get it out, Anna came up and said, ‘Father,
I want you to meet one of my dearest friends. Dr. Foster’s
daughter.’ Well, the priest was all smiles then. And shook
my hand and said he was
 very
 pleased and honored to
make my acquaintance. So it all turned out all right. Buthonestly, I didn’t know. I went up there as innocent as a
lamb.”
“You didn’t know that only Catholics take communion in a
Catholic church?” Macon Dead asked her, his tone making
it clear that he didn’t believe her.
“No, Macon. How would I know?”
“You see them put up their own school, keep their kids
out of public schools, and you still think their religious stuff
is open to anybody who wants to drop in?”
“Communion is communion.”
“You’re a silly woman.”
“Father Padrew didn’t think so.”
“You made a fool of yourself.”
“Mrs. Djvorak didn’t think so.”
“She was just trying to keep the wedding going, keep you
from fucking it up.”
“Macon, please don’t use that language in front of the
children.”
“What goddam children? Everybody in here is oldenough to vote.”
“There is no call for an argument.”
“You make a fool of yourself in a Catholic church,
embarrass everybody at the reception, and come to the
table to gloat about how wonderful you were?”
“Macon…”
“And sit there lying, saying you didn’t know any better?”
“Anna Djvorak wasn’t the least bit—”
“Anna Djvorak don’t even know your name! She called
you
 Dr. Foster’s daughter!
 I bet you one hundred dollars
she still don’t know your name! You by yourself ain’t
nobody. You your daddy’s daughter!”
“That’s so,” said Ruth in a thin but steady voice. “I
certainly am my daddy’s daughter.” She smiled.
Macon didn’t wait to put his fork down. He dropped it on
the table while his hand was on its way across the bread
plate becoming the fist he smashed into her jaw.
Milkman hadn’t planned any of it, but he had to know that
one day, after Macon hit her, he’d see his mother’s hand
cover her lips as she searched with her tongue for any
broken teeth, and discovering none, tried to adjust thepartial plate in her mouth without anyone noticing—and that
on that day he would not be able to stand it. Before his
father could draw his hand back, Milkman had yanked him
by the back of his coat collar, up out of his chair, and
knocked him into the radiator. The window shade flapped
and rolled itself up.
“You touch her again, one more time, and I’ll kill you.”
Macon was so shocked at being assaulted he could not
speak. He had come to believe, after years of creating
respect and fear wherever he put his foot down, after years
of being the tallest man in every gathering, that he was
impregnable. Now he crept along the wall looking at a man
who was as tall as he was—and forty years younger.
Just as the father brimmed with contradictory feelings as
he crept along the wall—humiliation, anger, and a grudging
feeling of pride in his son—so the son felt his own
contradictions. There was the pain and shame of seeing
his father crumple before any man—even himself. Sorrow
in discovering that the pyramid was not a five-thousand-
year wonder of the civilized world, mysteriously and
permanently constructed by generation after generation of
hardy men who had died in order to perfect it, but that it had
been made in the back room at Sears, by a clever window
dresser, of papier-mâché, guaranteed to last for a mere
lifetime.He also felt glee. A snorting, horse-galloping glee as old
as desire. He had won something and lost something in the
same instant. Infinite possibilities and enormous
responsibilities stretched out before him, but he was not
prepared to take advantage of the former, or accept the
burden of the latter. So he cock-walked around the table
and asked his mother, “Are you all right?”
She was looking at her fingernails. “Yes, I’m fine.”
Milkman looked at his sisters. He had never been able to
really distinguish them (or their roles) from his mother. They
were in their early teens when he was born; they were thirty-
five and thirty-six now. But since Ruth was only sixteen
years older than Lena, all three had always looked the
same age to him. Now when he met his sisters’ eyes over
the table, they returned him a look of hatred so fresh, so
new, it startled him. Their pale eyes no longer appeared to
blur into their even paler skin. It seemed to him as though
charcoal lines had been drawn around their eyes; that two
drag lines had been smudged down their cheeks, and their
rosy lips were swollen in hatred so full it was about to burst
through. Milkman had to blink twice before their faces
returned to the vaguely alarmed blandness he was
accustomed to. Quickly he left the room, realizing there was
no one to thank him—or abuse him. His action was his
alone. It would change nothing between his parents. It would
change nothing inside them. He had knocked his father
down and perhaps there were some new positions on thechessboard, but the game would go on.
Sleeping with Hagar had made him generous. Or so he
thought. Wide-spirited. Or so he imagined. Wide-spirited
and generous enough to defend his mother, whom he
almost never thought about, and to deck his father, whom
he both feared and loved.
Back in his bedroom, Milkman fiddled with things on his
dresser. There was a pair of silver-backed brushes his
mother had given him when he was sixteen, engraved with
his initials, the abbreviated degree designation of a doctor.
He and his mother had joked about it and she hinted
strongly that he ought to consider going to medical school.
He’d foisted her off with “How would that look? M.D., M.D. If
you were sick, would you go see a man called Dr. Dead?”
She laughed but reminded him that his middle name was
Foster. Couldn’t he use Foster as a last name? Dr. Macon
Foster. Didn’t that sound fine? He had to admit that it did.
The silver-backed brushes were a constant reminder of
what her wishes for him were—that he not stop his
education at high school, but go on to college and medical
school. She had as little respect for her husband’s work as
Macon had for college graduates. To Milkman’s father,
college was time spent in idleness, far away from the
business of life, which was learning to own things. He was
eager for his daughters to go to college—where they could
have found suitable husbands—and one, Corinthians, didgo. But it was pointless for Milkman, particularly since his
son’s presence was a real help to him in the office. So
much so that he had been able to get his bank friends to
speak to some of their friends and get his son moved out of
I-A draft classification and into a “necessary to support
family” status.
Milkman stood before his mirror and glanced, in the low
light of the wall lamp, at his reflection. He was, as usual,
unimpressed with what he saw. He had a fine enough face.
Eyes women complimented him on, a firm jaw line,
splendid teeth. Taken apart, it looked all right. Even better
than all right. But it lacked coherence, a coming together of
the features into a total self. It was all very tentative, the way
he looked, like a man peeping around a corner of
someplace he is not supposed to be, trying to make up his
mind whether to go forward or to turn back. The decision he
made would be extremely important, but the way in which
he made the decision would be careless, haphazard, and
uninformed.
Standing there in the lamplight, trying not to think of how
his father had looked creeping along the wall, he heard a
knock at his door. He didn’t want to see the face of Lena or
Corinthians, nor to have any secret talk with his mother. But
he was not any happier to see his father looming there in
the hall. A line of blood was still visible in the thin cut at the
corner of Macon’s mouth. But he stood straight, and his
eyes were steady.“Look, Daddy,” Milkman began, “I—”
“Don’t say anything,” Macon said, pushing past him. “Sit
down.”
Milkman moved toward the bed. “Look here, let’s try to
forget this. If you promise—”
“I told you to sit down. And down is what I mean.”
Macon’s voice was low, but his face looked like Pilate’s.
He closed the door. “You a big man now, but big ain’t nearly
enough. You have to be a whole man. And if you want to be
a whole man, you have to deal with the whole truth.”
“You don’t have to do any of this, you know. I don’t need
to know everything between you and Mama.”
“I do have to do it and you do need to know it. If you’re in
the business of raising your fist at your father, you better
have some intelligence behind that fist the next time you
throw it. Nothing I’m about to say is by way of apology or
excuse. It’s just information.
“I married your mother in 1917. She was sixteen, living
alone with her father. I can’t tell you I was in love with her.
People didn’t require that as much as they do now. Folks
were expected to be civilized to one another, honest, and—
and clear. You relied on people being what they said they
were, because there was no other way to survive. Theimportant thing, when you took a wife, was that the two of
you agreed on what was important.
“Your mother’s father never liked me and I have to say I
was very disappointed in him. He was just about the
biggest Negro in this city. Not the richest, but the most
respected. But a bigger hypocrite never lived. Kept all his
money in four different banks. Always calm and dignified. I
thought he was naturally that way until I found out he sniffed
ether. Negroes in this town worshipped him. He didn’t give
a damn about them, though. Called them cannibals. He
delivered both your sisters himself and each time all he was
interested in was the color of their skin. He would have
disowned you. I didn’t like the notion of his being his own
daughter’s doctor, especially since she was also my wife.
Mercy wouldn’t take colored then. Anyway, Ruth wouldn’t go
to any other doctor. I tried to get a midwife for her, but the
doctor said midwives were dirty. I told him a midwife
delivered me, and if a midwife was good enough for my
mother, a midwife was good enough for his daughter. Well,
we had some words between us about it, and I ended up
telling him that nothing could be nastier than a father
delivering his own daughter’s baby. That stamped it. We
had very little to say after that, but they did it anyway. Both
Lena and Corinthians. They let me do the naming by
picking a word blind, but that was all. Your sisters are just a
little over a year apart, you know. And both times he was
there. She had her legs wide open and he was there. I
know he was a doctor and doctors not supposed to bebothered by things like that, but he was a man before he
was a doctor. I knew then they’d ganged up on me forever
—the both of them—and no matter what I did, they
managed to have things their way. They made sure I
remembered whose house I was in, where the china came
from, how he sent to England for the Waterford bowl, and
again for the table they put it on. That table was so big they
had to take it apart to get it in the door. He was always
bragging about how he was the second man in the city to
have a two-horse carriage.
“Where I’d come from, the farm we had, that was nothing
to them. And what I was trying to do—they didn’t have any
interest in that. Buying shacks in shacktown, they called it.
‘How’s shacktown?’ That’s the way he’d greet me in the
evenings.
“But it wasn’t that. I could put up with that, because I knew
what I wanted, and pretty much how to get it. So I could put
up with that. Did put up with it. It was something else,
something I couldn’t put my finger on. I tried to get him to
spend some of that money out of those four banks once.
Some track land was going for a lot of money—railroad
money. Erie Lackawanna was buying. I had a good hunch
where the track would be laid. I walked all around over
there, the Shore Road, the docks, the fork in routes 6 and
2. I figured out just where the tracks would have to go. And
found land I could have got cheap and sold back to the
railroad agents. He wouldn’t lend me a dime. If he had, hewould have died a rich man, instead of a fair-to-middling
one. And I would have been way ahead. I asked your
mother to talk him into it. I told her exactly where the Erie
was headed. She said it had to be his decision; she
couldn’t influence him. She told me, her husband, that. Then
I began to wonder who she was married to—me or him.
“Well, he took sick.” Macon stopped, as though the
mention of illness reminded him of his own frailty, and
pulled a large white handkerchief out of his pocket. Gingerly
he pressed it against the thin cut on his lip. He looked at the
faint stain it made on his handkerchief. “All that ether,” he
said, “must have got in his blood. They had another name
for it, but I know it was that ether. He just lay down and
started swelling up. His body did; his legs and arms just
wasted away. He couldn’t see patients anymore, and for
the first time in his life the pompous donkey found out what
it was like to have to be sick and pay another donkey to
make you well. One of them doctors, the one that was
taking care of him—one of the same ones wouldn’t let him
set foot in their hospital, and who, if he had delivered
 their
daughter’s or wife’s baby, had even thought of it, would
have run him out of here on a rail—one of them, the ones he
thought worth his attention, well, he came in here with some
magic potion, Radiathor, and told him it would cure him.
Ruth was all excited. And for a few days he was better.
Then he got sicker. Couldn’t move, holes were forming in
his scalp. And he just lay there in that bed where your
mother still sleeps and then he died there. Helpless, fatstomach, skinny arms and legs, looking like a white rat. He
couldn’t digest his food, you know. Had to drink all his
meals and swallow something after every meal. I believe to
this day that was ether too.
“The night he died, I’d been over on the other side of
town, fixing a porch that fell down. Mr. Bradlee’s house.
Porch had been leaning for twenty years, and then just fell
down, split clean away from the foundation. I got some men
to help me and went over there to get it back up so the
people wouldn’t have to jump to get out the house and
climb up three feet to get in it. Somebody tiptoed up to me
and said, ‘Doctor died.’ Ruth, they said, was upstairs with
him. I figured she was upset and went up right away to
comfort her. I didn’t have time to change clothes from
working on the porch, but I went up anyway. She was sitting
in a chair next to his bed, and the minute she saw me she
jumped up and screamed at me, ‘You dare come in here
like that? Clean yourself! Clean up before you come in
here!’ It vexed me some, but I do respect the dead. I went
and washed up. Took a bath, put on a clean shirt and collar,
and went back in.” Macon paused again and touched his
cut lip as though that were where the pain that showed in
his eyes was coming from.
“In the bed,” he said, and stopped for so long Milkman
was not sure he was going to continue. “In the bed. That’s
where she was when I opened the door. Laying next to him.
Naked as a yard dog, kissing him. Him dead and white andpuffy and skinny, and she had his fingers in her mouth.
“Now, I want you to know I had a terrible time after that. I
started thinking all sorts of things. If Lena and Corinthians
were my children. I come to know pretty quick they were,
cause it was clear that bastard couldn’t fuck nothing. Ether
took care of whatever he had in that area long before I got
there. And he wouldn’t have been so worried about what
color skin they had unless they were coming from me. Then
I thought about his delivering Ruth’s babies. I’m not saying
that they had contact. But there’s lots of things a man can
do to please a woman, even if he can’t fuck. Whether or
not, the fact is she was in that bed sucking his fingers, and
if she do that when he was dead, what’d she do when he
was alive? Nothing to do but kill a woman like that. I swear,
many’s the day I regret she talked me out of killing her. But I
wasn’t looking forward to spending the rest of my days on
some rock pile. But you see, Macon, sometimes I can’t
catch hold of myself quick enough. It just gets out. Tonight,
when she said, ‘Yes, I am my daddy’s daughter,’ and gave
that little smirk…” Macon looked up at his son. The door of
his face had opened; his skin looked iridescent. With only a
minor break in his voice, he told him, “I am not a bad man. I
want you to know that. Or believe it. No man ever took his
responsibilities more seriously than I have. I’m not making
claims to sainthood, but you have to know it all. I’m forty
years older than you and I don’t have another forty in me.
Next time you take it into your head to jump me, I want you
to think about the man you think you whipping. And thinkabout the fact that next time I might not let you. Old as I am, I
might not let you.”
He stood up and pushed his handkerchief into his back
pocket.
“Don’t say anything now. But think about everything I’ve
said.”
Macon turned the doorknob, and without a backward
glance, left the room.
Milkman sat on the edge of his bed; everything was still
except for the light buzzing in his head. He felt curiously
disassociated from all that he had heard. As though a
stranger that he’d sat down next to on a park bench had
turned to him and begun to relate some intimacy. He was
entirely sympathetic to the stranger’s problems—
understood perfectly his view of what had happened to him
—but part of his sympathy came from the fact that he
himself was not involved or in any way threatened by the
stranger’s story. It was quite the opposite from the feeling
he’d had an hour or less ago. The alien who had just
walked out of his room was also the man he felt
passionately enough about to strike with all the fervor he
could summon up. Even now he could feel the tingle in his
shoulder that had signaled the uncontrollable urge to smash
his father’s face. On the way upstairs to his room he had felt
isolated, but righteous. He was a man who saw anotherman hit a helpless person. And he had interfered. Wasn’t
that the history of the world? Isn’t that what men did?
Protected the frail and confronted the King of the Mountain?
And the fact that the frail was his mother and the King of the
Mountain his father made it more poignant, but did not
change the essential facts. No. He would not pretend that it
was love for his mother. She was too insubstantial, too
shadowy for love. But it was her vaporishness that made
her more needful of defense. She was not a maternal
drudge, her mind pressed flat, her shoulders hunched under
the burden of housework and care of others, brutalized by a
bear of a man. Nor was she the acid-tongued shrew who
defended herself with a vicious vocabulary and a fast lip.
Ruth was a pale but complicated woman given to
deviousness and ultra-fine manners. She seemed to know
a lot and understand very little. It was an interesting train of
thought, and new for him. Never had he thought of his
mother as a person, a separate individual, with a apart
from allowing or interfering with his own.
Milkman put on his jacket and left the house. It was
seven-thirty in the evening and not yet dark. He wanted to
walk and breathe some other air. He wouldn’t know what to
feel until he knew what to think. And it was difficult thinking
in that room where the silver-backed brushes with the M.D.
initials shone in the light and where the chair his father had
just sat in still held the imprint of his buttocks in the cushion.
As the stars made themselves visible, Milkman tried to
figure what was true and what part of what was true hadanything to do with him. What was he supposed to do with
this new information his father had dumped on him? Was it
an effort to cop a plea? How was he supposed to feel
about the two of them now? Was it
 true,
 first of all? Did his
mother…had his mother made it with her own father?
Macon had said no. That the doctor was impotent. How did
he know? Well, he must have known what he was talking
about, because he was much too eager for it to be true to
let it go if there were any possibility it could have taken
place. Still, he had admitted there were “other things” a
man could do to please a woman. “Goddam,” Milkman said
aloud. “What the fuck did he tell me all that shit for?” He
didn’t want to know any of it. There was nothing he could do
about it. The doctor was dead. You can’t do the past over.
Milkman’s confusion was rapidly turning to anger.
“Strange motherfuckers,” he whispered. “Strange.” If he
wanted lay off, he thought, why didn’t he just say that? Just
come to me like a man and say, Cool it. You cool it and I’ll
cool it. We’ll both cool it. And I’d say, Okay, you got it. But
no. He comes to me with some way-out tale about how
come and why.
Milkman was heading toward Southside. Maybe he could
find Guitar. A drink with Guitar would be just the thing. Or if
he couldn’t find Guitar, he’d go see Hagar. No. He didn’t
want to talk to Hagar, to any woman, just yet. Talk about
strange. Now, that was a really strange bunch. His whole
family was a bunch of crazies. Pilate singing all day andtalking off the wall. Reba turning on for everything in pants.
And Hagar…well, she was just fine, but still, she wasn’t
regular. She had some queer ways. But at least they were
fun and not full of secrets.
Where would Guitar be? Never anywhere when you really
needed him. A real pop-up. Popped up anywhere, anytime,
but never on time. Milkman realized he was whispering
every now and then and that people on the street were
looking at him. Suddenly it seemed to him that there were a
lot of people out for that time of day. Where the hell was
everybody going? He made an effort not to vocalize his
thoughts.
“You want to be a whole man, you have to deal with the
whole truth,” his father had said. Couldn’t I be a whole man
without knowing all that? “You better have some intelligence
behind that fist.” Okay. What intelligence? That my mama
screwed her daddy. That my grandfather was a high-yellow
nigger who loved ether and hated black skin. So what did
he let you marry his daughter for? So he could screw her
without the neighbors knowing it? Did you ever catch them
doing it? No. You just felt something you couldn’t put your
finger on. His money, probably. He wouldn’t let you put your
finger on that, would he? And his daughter wouldn’t help
you, would she? So you figured they must be gettin it on the
operating table. If he’d given you those four bankbooks to
do what you liked, to buy up the Erie Lackawanna Railroad,
he could have had her all he liked, right? He could havecome right in your bed, and the three of you could have had
a ball. He’d get one tit and you’d get…the…other….
Milkman stopped dead in his tracks. Cold sweat broke
out on his neck. People jostled him trying to get past the
solitary man standing in their way. He had remembered
something. Or believed he remembered something. Maybe
he’d dreamed it and it was the dream he remembered. The
picture was developing, of the two men in the bed with his
mother, each nibbling on a breast, but the picture cracked
and in the crack another picture emerged. There was this
green room, a very small green room, and his mother was
sitting in the green room and her breasts were uncovered
and somebody was sucking them and the somebody was
himself. So? So what? My mother nursed me. Mothers
nurse babies. Why the sweat? He walked on, hardly
noticing the people pushing past him, their annoyed, tight
faces. He tried to see more of the picture, but couldn’t.
Then he heard something that he knew was related to the
picture. Laughter. Somebody he couldn’t see, in the room
laughing…at him and at his mother is ashamed. She
lowers her eyes and won’t look at him. “Look at me, Mama.
Look at me.” But she doesn’t and the laughter is loud now.
Everybody is laughing. Did he wet his pants? Is his mother
ashamed because while he was nursing he wet his pants?
What pants? He didn’t wear pants then. He wore diapers.
Babies always wet their diapers. does he think he has
pants on? Blue pants with elastic around the calf. Little blue
corduroy knickers. Why is he dressed that way? Is that whatthe man is laughing at? Because he is a tiny baby dressed
in blue knickers? He sees himself standing there. “Look at
me, Mama,” is all he can think of to say. “Please look at
me.” Standing? He is a tiny baby. Nursing in his mother’s
arms. He can’t stand up.
“I couldn’t stand up,” he said aloud, and turned toward a
shop window. There was his face leaning out of the
upturned collar of his jacket, and he knew. “My mother
nursed me when I was old enough to talk, stand up, and
wear knickers, and somebody saw it and laughed and—
and that is why they call me Milkman and that is why my
father never does and that is why my mother never does,
but everybody else does. And how did I forget that? And
why? And if she did that to me when there was no reason
for it, when I also drank milk and Ovaltine and everything
else from a glass, then maybe she did other things with her
father?”
Milkman closed his eyes and then opened them. The
street was even more crowded with people, all going in the
direction he was coming from. All walking hurriedly and
bumping against him. After a while he realized that nobody
was walking on the other side of the street. There were no
cars and the street lights were on, now that darkness had
come, but the sidewalk on the other side of the street was
completely empty. He turned around to see where
everybody was going, but there was nothing to see except
their backs and hats pressing forward into the night. Helooked again at the other side of Not Doctor Street. Not a
soul.
He touched the arm of a man in a cap who was trying to
get past him. “Why is everybody on this side of the street?”
he asked him.
“Watch it, buddy,” the man snapped, and moved on with
the crowd.
Milkman walked on, still headed toward Southside, never
once wondering why he himself did not cross over to the
other side of the street, where no one was walking at all.
He believed he was thinking coldly, clearly. He had never
loved his mother, but had always known that she had loved
him. And that had always seemed right to him, the way it
should be. Her confirmed, eternal love of him, love that he
didn’t even have to earn or deserve, seemed to him natural.
And now it was decomposing. He wondered if there was
anyone in the world who liked him. Liked him for himself
alone. His visits to the wine house seemed (before his talk
with his father) an extension of the love he had come to
expect from his mother. Not that Pilate or Reba felt the
possessive love for him that his mother did, but they had
accepted him without question and with all the ease in the
world. They took him seriously too. Asked him questions
and thought all his responses to things were important
enough to laugh at or quarrel with him about. Everything hedid at home was met with quiet understanding from his
mother and his sisters (or indifference and criticism from
his father). The women in the wine house were indifferent to
nothing and understood nothing. Every sentence, every
word, was new to them and they listened to what he said
like bright-eyed ravens, trembling in their eagerness to
catch and interpret every sound in the universe. Now he
questioned them. Questioned everybody. His father had
crept along the wall and then come upstairs with a terrible
piece of news. His mother had been portrayed not as a
mother who simply adored her only son, but as an obscene
child playing dirty games with whatever male was near—be
it her father or her son. Even his sisters, the most tolerant
and accommodating of all the women he knew, had
changed their faces and rimmed their eyes with red and
charcoal dust.
Where was Guitar? He needed to find the one person left
whose clarity never failed him, and unless he was out of the
state, Milkman was determined to find him.
His first stop, Tommy’s Barbershop, was fruitful. Guitar
was there with several other men, leaning in various
attitudes, but all listening to something.
As Milkman entered and spotted Guitar’s back, he was
so relieved he shouted, “Hey, Guitar!”
“Sh!” said Railroad Tommy. Guitar turned around andmotioned him to come in but to be quiet. They were
listening to the radio and muttering and shaking their
heads. It was some time before Milkman discovered what
they were so tense about. A young Negro boy had been
found stomped to death in Sunflower County, Mississippi.
There were no questions about who stomped him—his
murderers had boasted freely—and there were no
questions about the motive. The boy had whistled at some
white woman, refused to deny he had slept with others, and
was a Northerner visiting the South. His name was Till.
Railroad Tommy was trying to keep the noise down so
he could hear the last syllable of the newscaster’s words. In
a few seconds it was over, since the announcer had only a
few speculations and even fewer facts. The minute he went
on to another topic of news, the barbershop broke into loud
conversation. Railroad Tommy, the one who had tried to
maintain silence, was himself completely silent now. He
moved to his razor strop while Hospital Tommy tried to
keep his customer in the chair. Porter, Guitar, Freddie the
janitor, and three or four other men were exploding,
shouting angry epithets all over the room. Apart from
Milkman, only Railroad Tommy and Empire State were
quiet—Railroad Tommy because he was preoccupied with
his razor and Empire State because he was simple, and
probably mute, although nobody seemed sure about that.
There was no question whatever about his being simple.
Milkman tried to focus on the crisscrossedconversations.
“It’ll be in the morning paper.”
“Maybe it will, and maybe it won’t,” said Porter.
“It was on the radio! Got to be in the paper!” said
Freddie.
“They don’t put that kind of news in no white paper. Not
unless he raped somebody.”
“What you bet? What you bet it’ll be in there?” said
Freddie.
“Bet anything you can lose,” Porter answered.
“You on for five.”
“Wait a minute,” Porter shouted. “Say where.”
“What you mean, ‘where’? I got five says it’ll be in the
morning paper.”
“On the sports page?” asked Hospital Tommy.
“Or the funny papers?” said Nero Brown.
“No, man. Front page. I bet five dollars on front page.”
“What the fuck is the difference?” shouted Guitar. “A kidis stomped and you standin round fussin about whether
some cracker put it in the paper. He stomped, ain’t he?
Dead, ain’t he? Dead, ain’t he? Cause he whistled at some
Scarlett O’Hara cunt.”
“What’d he do it for?” asked Freddie. “He knew he was
in Mississippi. What he think that was? Tom Sawyer
Land?”
“So he whistled! So what!” Guitar was steaming. “He
supposed to die for that?”
“He from the North,” said Freddie. “Acting big down in
Bilbo country. Who the hell he think he is?”
“Thought he was a man, that’s what,” said Railroad
Tommy.
“Well, he thought wrong,” Freddie said. “Ain’t no black
men in Bilbo country.”
“The hell they ain’t,” said Guitar.
“Who?” asked Freddie.
“Till. That’s who.”
“He dead. A dead man ain’t no man. A dead man is a
corpse. That’s all. A corpse.”“A living coward ain’t a man either,” said Porter.
“Who you talking to?” Freddie was quick to get the
personal insult.
“Calm down, you two,” said Hospital Tommy.
“You!” shouted Porter.
“You calling me a coward?” Freddie wanted to get the
facts first.
“If the shoe fits, put your rusty foot in it.”
“You all gonna keep that up, you have to get out of my
shop.”
“Tell that nigger somethin,” said Porter.
“I’m serious now,” Hospital Tommy went on. “There is no
cause for all this. The boy’s dead. His mama’s screaming.
Won’t let them bury him. That ought to be enough colored
blood on the streets. You want to spill blood, spill the
crackers’ blood that bashed his face in.”
“Oh, they’ll catch them,” said Walters.
“Catch ’em? Catch ’em?” Porter was astounded. “You
out of your fuckin mind? They’ll catch ’em, all right, and give
’em a big party and a medal.”“Yeah. The whole town planning a parade,” said Nero.
“They got to catch ’em.”
“So they catch ’em. You think they’ll get any time? Not on
your life!”
“How can they
 not
 give ’em time?” Walters’ voice was
high and tight.
“How? Just
 don’t,
 that’s how.” Porter fidgeted with his
watch chain.
“But everybody knows about it now. It’s all over.
Everywhere. The law is the law.”
“You wanna bet? This is sure money!”
“You stupid, man. Real stupid. Ain’t no law for no colored
man except the one sends him to the chair,” said Guitar.
“They say Till had a knife,” Freddie said.
“They always say that. He could of had a wad of bubble
gum, they’d swear it was a hand grenade.”
“I still say he shoulda kept his mouth shut,” said Freddie.
“You should keep yours shut,” Guitar told him.“Hey, man!” Again Freddie felt the threat.
“South’s bad,” Porter said. “Bad. Don’t nothing change in
the good old U.S. of A. Bet his daddy got his balls busted
off in the Pacific somewhere.”
“If they ain’t busted already, them crackers will see to it.
Remember them soldiers in 1918?”
“Ooooo. Don’t bring all that up….”
The men began to trade tales of atrocities, first stories
they had heard, then those they’d witnessed, and finally the
things that had happened to themselves. A litany of
personal humiliation, outrage, and anger turned sicklelike
back to themselves as humor. They laughed then,
uproariously, about the speed with which they had run, the
pose they had assumed, the ruse they had invented to
escape or decrease some threat to their manliness, their
humanness. All but Empire State, who stood, broom in
hand and drop-lipped, with the expression of a very
intelligent ten-year-old.
And Guitar. His animation had died down, leaving its
traces in his eyes.
Milkman waited until he could get his attention. Then they
both left, walking silently down the street.
“What is it? You looked pissed when you came in.”“Nothing,” said Milkman. “Where can we get a drink?”
“Mary’s?”
“Naw. Too many broads hasslin you.”
“It’s just eight-thirty. Cedar Lounge don’t open till nine.”
“Shit.
 You
 think. I’m tired.”
“I got a taste at the pad,” Guitar offered.
“Solid. Your box working?”
“Uh uh. Still broke.”
“I need some music. Music and a taste.”
“Then it’ll have to be Miss Mary. I’ll keep the ladies
working elsewhere.”
“Yeah? I want to see you tell those ladies what to do.”
“Come on, Milk. This ain’t New York; choices are
limited.”
“Okay. Mary’s.”
They walked a few blocks to the corner of Rye and Tenth
streets. When they passed a tiny bakery, Guitar swallowedhard and quickened his steps. Mary’s was the bar/lounge
that did the best business in the Blood Bank—although
each of the three other corners had a similar place—
because of Mary herself, a pretty but overpainted
barmaid/part-owner, who was sassy, funny, and good
company for the customers. Whores worked her bar in
safety; lonely drunks could drink there in peace; cruisers
found chickens or hawks—whichever they preferred, even
jailbait; restless housewives were flattered there and
danced their heels off; teen-agers learned “life rules” there;
and everybody found excitement there. For in Mary’s the
lights made everybody beautiful, or if not beautiful, then
fascinating. The music gave tone and texture to
conversations that would put you to sleep anywhere else.
And the food and drink provoked people into behavior that
resembled nothing less than high drama.
But all that began around eleven o’clock. It was
practically empty at eight-thirty in the evening, when Guitar
and Milkman arrived. They slid into a booth and ordered
Scotch and Milkman drank his up quickly and ordered
another before asking Guitar, “How come they call me
Milkman?”
“How the fuck would I know? That’s your name, ain’t it?”
“My name is Macon Dead.”
“You drag me all the way over here to tell me yourname?”
“I need to know it.”
“Aw, drink up, man.”
“You know your name, don’t you?”
“Cut the shit. What’s on your mind?”
“I decked my old man.”
“Decked?”
“Yeah. Hit him. Knocked him into the fuckin radiator.”
“What’d he do to you?”
“Nothin.”
“Nothin? You just up and popped him?”
“Yeah.”
“For no reason?”
“He hit my mother.”
“Oh.”
“He hit her. I hit him.”“That’s tough.”
“Yeah.”
“I mean it.”
“I know.” Milkman sighed heavily. “I know.”
“Listen. I can understand how you feel.”
“Uh uh. You can’t understand. Unless it happens to you,
you can’t understand.”
“Yes I can. You know I used to hunt a lot. When I was a
kid down home—”
“Oh, shit, do we have to hear about Alabama again?”
“Not Alabama. Florida.”
“Whatever.”
“Just listen, Milkman. Listen to me. I used to hunt a lot.
From the time I could walk almost and I was good at it.
Everybody said I was a natural. I could hear anything, smell
anything, and see like a cat. You know what I mean? A
natural. And I was never scared—not of the dark or
shadows or funny sounds, and I was never afraid to kill.
Anything. Rabbit, bird, snakes, squirrels, deer. And I was
little. It never bothered me. I’d take a shot at anything. Thegrown men used to laugh about it. Said I was a natural-born
hunter. After we moved up here with my grandmother, that
was the only thing about the South I missed. So when my
grandmother used to send us kids back home in the
summer, all I thought about was hunting again. They’d pile
us on the bus and we’d spend the summer with my
grandmother’s sister, Aunt Florence. Soon’s I got there I
looked for my uncles, to go out in the woods. And one
summer—I was about ten or eleven, I guess—we all went
out and I went off on my own. I thought I saw deer tracks. It
wasn’t the season for deer, but that didn’t bother me any. If I
saw one I killed one. I was right about the tracks; it was a
deer, but spaced funny—not wide apart like I thought they
should be, but still a deer. You know they step in their own
prints. If you never saw them before you’d think a two-
legged creature was jumping. Anyway, I stayed on the trail
until I saw some bushes. The light was good and all of a
sudden I saw a rump between the branches. I dropped it
with the first shot and finished it with the next. Now, I want to
tell you I was feeling good. I saw myself showing my uncles
what I’d caught. But when I got up to it—and I was going
real slow because I thought I might have to shoot it again—I
saw it was a doe. Not a young one; she was old, but she
was still a doe. I felt…bad. You know what I mean? I killed a
doe. A doe, man.”
Milkman was gazing at Guitar with the wide steady eyes
of a man trying to look sober.“So I know how you felt when you saw your father hit your
mother. It’s like that doe. A man shouldn’t do that. You
couldn’t help what you felt.”
Milkman nodded his head, but it was clear to Guitar that
nothing he had said had made any difference. Chances
were Milkman didn’t even know what a doe was, and
whatever it was, it wasn’t his mother. Guitar ran his finger
around the rim of his glass.
“What’d she do, Milk?”
“Nothin. Smiled. He didn’t like her smile.”
“You’re not making sense. Talk sense. And slow down.
You know you can’t hold liquor.”
“What you mean, I can’t hold liquor?”
“’Scuse me. Help yourself.”
“I’m trying to have a serious conversation and you talking
shit, Guitar.”
“I’m listening.”
“And I’m talking.”
“Yes, you talking, but what are you saying? Your papa
clips your mama cause she smiles at him. You clip himcause he clipped her. Now, is that the way you all spend the
evening in your house or is there something else you’re
trying to say?”
“Came up to talk to me afterwards.”
“Who?”
“My old man.”
“What’d he say?”
“Said I had to be a whole man and know the whole thing.”
“Go on.”
“He was gonna buy the Erie Lackawanna, but my mother
wouldn’t let him.”
“Oh, yeah? Maybe she needs beatin.”
“That’s very funny, man.”
“Why ain’t you laughing, then?”
“I am laughing. Inside.”
“Milk?”
“Yeah?”“Your daddy slapped your mama, right?”
“Right. Right.”
“You hit him, right?”
“Right.”
“Nobody appreciates what you did. Right?”
“Hey, Guitar. You right again.”
“Not your mother, not your sisters, and your daddy
appreciates it least of all.”
“Least of all. Right.”
“So he bawls you out.”
“Yep. No. No. He…”
“He talks quiet to you?”
“Right!”
“Explains things to you.”
“Yeah.”
“About why he hit her.”“Uh huh.”
“And it’s all about something that happened a long time
ago? Before you were born?”
“You got it! You are a very smart little colored boy. And I
am going to tell Oxford University about you.”
“And you wish he’d kept it to himself because it don’t
concern you and you can’t do nothin about it anyway.”
“You have just passed the course. Guitar Bains, Ph.D.”
“But it bothers you just the same?”
“Let me think.” Milkman closed his eyes and tried to prop
his chin on his hand, but it was too difficult. He was trying to
get as drunk as possible as rapidly as possible. “Yes. Well,
it did bother me. Before I came in here it did. I don’t know,
Guitar.” He became serious and his face had the still and
steady look of a grown man trying not to vomit…or cry.
“Forget it, Milk. Whatever it is, forget it. It ain’t nothin.
Whatever he told you, forget it.”
“I hope I can. I sure hope I can.”
“Listen, baby, people do funny things. Specially us. The
cards are stacked against us and just trying to stay in the
game, stay alive and in the game, makes us do funnythings. Things we can’t help. Things that make us hurt one
another. We don’t even know why. But look here, don’t carry
it inside and don’t give it to nobody else. Try to understand
it, but if you can’t, just forget it and keep yourself strong,
man.”
“I don’t know, Guitar. Things seem to be getting to me,
you know?”
“Don’t let ’em. Unless you got a plan. Look at Till. They
got to him too. Now he’s just an item on WJR’s evening
news.”
“He was crazy.”
“No. Not crazy. Young, but not crazy.”
“Who cares if he fucks a white girl? Anybody can do that.
What’s he bragging for? Who cares?”
“Crackers care.”
“Then they’re crazier’n he is.”
“Of course. But they’re alive and crazy.”
“Yeah, well, fuck Till. I’m the one in trouble.”
“Did I hear you right, brother?”“All right. I didn’t mean that. I…”
“What’s your trouble? You don’t like your name?”
“No.” Milkman let his head fall to the back of the booth.
“No, I don’t like my name.”
“Let me tell you somethin, baby. Niggers get their names
the way they get everything else—the best way they can.
The best way they can.”
Milkman’s eyes were blurred now and so were his words.
“Why can’t we get our stuff the right way?”
“The best way is the right way. Come on. I’ll take you
home.”
“No, I can’t go back there.”
“No? Where then?”
“Let me stay in your pad.”
“Oh, man, you know my situation. One of us’ll have to
sleep on the floor. Besides…”
“I’ll sleep on the floor.”
“Besides, I may have company.”
“No shit?”“No shit. Come on, let’s go.”
“I ain’t going home, Guitar. Hear me?”
“Want me to take you over to Hagar’s?” Guitar motioned
to the waitress for the check.
“Hagar’s. Yeah. Sweet Hagar. Wonder what her name
is.”
“You just said it.”
“I mean her last name. Her daddy’s name.”
“Ask Reba.” Guitar paid their bar bill and helped Milkman
negotiate to the door. The wind had risen and cooled.
Guitar flapped his elbows against the cold.
“Ask anybody
 but
 Reba,” said Milkman. “Reba don’t
know her own last name.”
“Ask Pilate.”
“Yeah. I’ll ask Pilate. Pilate knows. It’s in that dumb-ass
box hanging from her ear. Her own name and everybody
else’s. Bet mine’s in there too. I’m gonna ask her what my
name is. Say, you know how my old man’s daddy got his
name?”“Uh uh. How?”
“Cracker gave it to him.”
“Sho’nough?”
“Yep. And he took it. Like a fuckin sheep. Somebody
should have shot him.”
“What for? He was already Dead.”Chapter 4
Once again he did his Christmas shopping in a Rexall
drugstore. It was late, the day before Christmas Eve, and
he hadn’t had the spirit or energy or presence of mind to do
it earlier or thoughtfully. Boredom, which had begun as a
mild infection, now took him over completely. No activity
seemed worth the doing, no conversation worth having. The
fluttery preparations at home seemed fake and dingy. His
mother was going on as she did every year about the
incredible price of trees and butter. As though their tree
would be anything other than it had always been: the huge
shadowy thing in a corner burdened with decorations she
had had since she was a girl. As if her fruitcakes were
edible, or her turkey done all the way to the bone. His father
gave them all envelopes of varying amounts of money,
never thinking that just once they might like something he
actually went into a department store and selected.
The gifts Milkman had to buy were few and easily chosen
in a drugstore. Cologne and dusting powder for Magdalene
called Lena; a compact for Corinthians; a five-pound box of
chocolates for his mother. And some shaving equipment for
his father. In fifteen minutes he was done. The only problem
gift was Hagar’s. It was hard to select something hurriedly
for her since she liked everything but preferred nothing.
More important, he wasn’t sure he wanted to keep it up.Keep up the whole business of “going with” Hagar. He
seldom took her anywhere except to the movies and he
never took her to parties where people of his own set
danced and laughed and developed intrigues among
themselves. Everybody who knew him knew about Hagar,
but she was considered his private honey pot, not a real or
legitimate girl friend—not someone he might marry. And
only one or two of the various women he dated “seriously”
ever put up a fight about her since they believed she was
less than a rival.
Now, after more than a dozen years, he was getting tired
of her. Her eccentricities were no longer provocative and
the stupefying ease with which he had gotten and stayed
between her legs had changed from the great good fortune
he’d considered it, to annoyance at her refusal to make him
hustle for it, work for it, do something difficult for it. He didn’t
even have to pay for it. It was so free, so abundant, it had
lost its fervor. There was no excitement, no galloping of
blood in his neck or his heart at the thought of her.
She was the third beer. Not the first one, which the throat
receives with almost tearful gratitude; nor the second, that
confirms and extends the pleasure of the first. But the third,
the one you drink because it’s there, because it can’t hurt,
and because what difference does it make?
Perhaps the end of the year was a good time to call it off.
It wasn’t going anywhere and it was keeping him lazy, like apampered honey bear who had only to stick out his paw for
another scoop, and so had lost the agility of the tree-
climbers, but not the recollection of how thrilling the search
had been.
He would buy her something for Christmas, of course,
something nice to remember him by, but nothing that would
give her any ideas about marriage. There was some
costume jewelry on display. She might like that, but it would
pale before the diamond ring Reba had stuck down in her
dress. A Timex? She would never look at it. Staring at the
glass tube that housed the watches, he found himself
getting angry. All this indecision about what to get for Hagar
was new. At Christmases past he simply chose (or had his
sisters choose) from a long list of things that Hagar had
mentioned specifically. Things quite out of place in her
household: a navy-blue satin bathrobe (this for a woman
who lived in a house that had no bathroom); a chubby; a
snood with a velvet bow; a rhinestone bracelet with earrings
to match; patent leather pumps; White Shoulders cologne.
Milkman used to wonder at her specificity and her
acquisitiveness until he reminded himself that Pilate and
Reba celebrated no holidays. Yet their generosity was so
wholehearted it looked like carelessness, and they did their
best to satisfy every whim Hagar had. When he first took
her in his arms, Hagar was a vain and somewhat distant
creature. He liked to remember it that way—that he took
her in his arms—but in truth it was she who called him back
into the bedroom and stood there smiling while sheunbuttoned her blouse.
From the time he first saw her, when he was twelve and
she was seventeen, he was deeply in love with her,
alternately awkward and witty in her presence. She babied
him, ignored him, teased him—did anything she felt like,
and he was grateful just to see her do anything or be any
way. A good part of the enthusiasm with which he collected
his father’s rents was because of the time it gave him to
visit the wine house and, hopefully, find Hagar there. He
was free to drop in anytime and after school he tried to
make sure he saw her.
Years passed and his puppy breath came as fast as ever
in Hagar’s presence. It slowed finally, after Guitar took him
to his first Southside party, and after he found himself
effortlessly popular with girls of his own age and in his own
neighborhood. But while his breath was no longer that of a
puppy, Hagar could still whip it into a pant when he was
seventeen and she was twenty-two. Which she did on the
dullest flattest day he could remember, a throw-away day in
March when he drove his father’s two-tone Ford over to her
house for two bottles of wine. Milkman was much sought
after and depended upon to secure the liquor he and his
under-twenty-one friends believed vital to a party. When he
got to Pilate’s he walked in on a domestic crisis.
Reba’s new man friend had asked her for a small loan
and she had told him that she didn’t have any money at all.The man, who had received two or three nice presents from
her unasked, thought she was lying and was trying to tell
him to shove off. They were quarreling in the backyard—
that is, the man was quarreling. Reba was crying and trying
to convince him that what she’d said was true. Just after
Milkman opened the door, Hagar came running from the
bedroom, where she’d been looking out the back window.
She screamed to Pilate, “Mama! He’s hitting her! I saw
him! With his fist, Mama!”
Pilate looked up from a fourth-grade geography book
she was reading and closed it. Slowly, it seemed to
Milkman, she walked over to a shelf that hung over the dry
sink, put the geography book on it, and removed a knife.
Slowly still, she walked out the front door—there was no
back door—and as soon as she did, Milkman could hear
Reba’s screams and the man’s curses.
It didn’t occur to him to stop Pilate—her mouth was not
moving and her earring flashed fire—but he did follow her,
as did Hagar, around to the back of the house, where,
approaching the man from the back, she whipped her right
arm around his neck and positioned the knife at the edge of
his heart. She waited until the man felt the knife point before
she jabbed it skillfully, about a quarter of an inch through his
shirt into the skin. Still holding his neck, so he couldn’t see
but could feel the blood making his shirt sticky, she talked
to him.“Now, I’m not going to kill you, honey. Don’t you worry
none. Just be still a minute, the heart’s right here, but I’m not
going to stick it in any deeper. Cause if I stick it in any
deeper, it’ll go straight through your heart. So you have to
be real still, you hear? You can’t move a inch cause I might
lose control. It’s just a little hole now, honey, no more’n a pin
scratch. You might lose about two tablespoons of blood, but
no more. And if you’re real still, honey, I can get it back out
without no mistake. But before I do that, I thought we’d have
a little talk.”
The man closed his eyes. Sweat ran from his temples
down the sides of his face. A few neighbors who had heard
Reba’s screams had gathered in Pilate’s backyard. They
knew right away that the man was a newcomer to the city.
Otherwise he would have known a few things about Reba,
one of which was that she gave away everything she had
and if there was a case quarter in that house she’d have
given it to him; and more important, he would have known
not to fool with anything that belonged to Pilate, who never
bothered anybody, was helpful to everybody, but who also
was believed to have the power to step out of her skin, set
a bush afire from fifty yards, and turn a man into a ripe
rutabaga—all on account of the fact that she had no navel.
So they didn’t have much sympathy for him. They just
craned their necks to hear better what Pilate was telling
him.
“You see, darlin, that there is the only child I got. The firstbaby I ever had, and if you could turn around and see my
face, which of course you can’t cause my hand might slip,
you’d know she’s also the last. Women are foolish, you
know, and mamas are the most foolish of all. And you know
how mamas are, don’t you? You got a mama, ain’t you?
Sure you have, so you know what I’m talking about. Mamas
get hurt and nervous when somebody don’t like they
children. First real misery I ever had in my life was when I
found out somebody—a little teeny tiny boy it was—didn’t
like my little girl. Made me so mad, I didn’t know what to do.
We do the best we can, but we ain’t got the strength you
men got. That’s why it makes us so sad if a grown man
start beating up on one of us. You know what I mean? I’d
hate to pull this knife out and have you try some other time
to act mean to my little girl. Cause one thing I know for sure:
whatever she done, she’s been good to
 you.
 Still, I’d hate
to push it in more and have your mama feel like I do now. I
confess, I don’t know what to do. Maybe you can help me.
Tell me, what should I do?”
The man struggled for breath and Pilate eased up on his
throat but not his heart.
“Lemme go,” he whispered.
“Hmmmmm?”
“Lemme go. I…won’t never…put a hand on her. I
promise.”“A real promise, sugar?”
“Yeah. I promise. You won’t never see me no more.”
Reba sat on the ground, her arms around her knees,
staring through her unswollen eye at the scene as though
she were at a picture show. Her lip was split and her cheek
was badly bruised, and though her skirt and hands were
stained with her effort to stop the blood pouring from her
nose, a little still trickled down.
Pilate plucked the knife out of the man’s shirt and took
her arm away. He lurched a little, looked down at the blood
on his clothes and up at Pilate, and licking his lips, backed
all the way to the side of the house under Pilate’s gaze. Her
lips didn’t start moving again until he was out of sight and
running down the road.
All attention turned to Reba, who was having difficulty
trying to stand up. She said she thought something was
broken inside in the place where he’d kicked her. Pilate felt
her ribs and said nothing was broken. But Reba said she
wanted to go to the hospital. (It was her dream to be a
patient in a hospital; she was forever trying to get admitted,
since in her picture-show imagination, it was a nice hotel.
She gave blood there as often as they would let her, and
stopped only when the blood bank was moved to an office-
type clinic some distance away from Mercy.) She was
insistent now, and Pilate surrendered her judgment toReba’s. A neighbor offered to drive them and off they went,
leaving Milkman to buy his wine from Hagar.
He was delighted with the performance and followed
Hagar into the house to laugh and talk excitedly about it.
She was as tranquil as he was agitated, as monosyllabic
as he was garrulous.
“Was that something? Wow! She’s two inches taller than
he is, and she’s talking about weak.”
“We are weak.”
“Compared to what? A B-52?”
“Every woman’s not as strong as she is.”
“I hope not. Half as strong is too much.”
“Well, muscle strength is one thing. I meant women are
weak in other ways.”
“Name some. I want you to name some for me. Where
are you weak?”
“I don’t mean me. I mean other women.”
“You don’t have any weakness?”
“I haven’t found any.”“I suppose you think you can whip me.” It was the
seventeen-year-old’s constant preoccupation—who could
whip him.
“Probably,” said Hagar.
“Ha! Well, I guess I better not try to prove you wrong.
Pilate might be back with her knife.”
“Pilate scare you?”
“Yeah. Don’t she scare you?”
“No. Nobody scares me.”
“Yeah You tough. I now you tough.”
“Not tough. I just don’t let people tell me what to do. I do
what I want.”
“Pilate tells you what to do.”
“But I don’t have to do it, if I don’t want to.”
“Wish I could say the same for my mother.”
“Your mother boss you?”
“Well … not boss exactly.” Milkman floundered for a word
to describe the nagging he thought he was a victim of.“How old are you now?” asked Hagar. She lifted her
eyebrows like a woman mildly interested in the age of a
small child.
“Seventeen.”
“You old enough to be married.” Hagar said it with the
strong implication that he should not allow his mother to
have any say about what he did.
“I’m waiting for you,” he said, trying to regain (or acquire)
some masculine flippancy.
“Be a long wait.”
“Why?”
Hagar sighed as if her patience was being tried. “I’d like
to be in love with the man I marry.”
“Try me. You could learn if you’d try.”
“You’re too young for me.”
“State of mind,” he said.
“Uh huh. My mind.”
“You’re like all women. Waiting for Prince Charming to
come trotting down the street and pull up in front of yourdoor. Then you’ll sweep down the steps and powie! Your
eyes meet and he’ll yank you up on his horse and the two of
you ride off into the wind. Violins playing and ‘courtesy of
MGM’ stamped on the horse’s butt. Right?”
“Right,” she said.
“What you going to do in the meantime?”
“Watch the lump grow in a little boy’s pants.”
Milkman smiled, but he was not amused. Hagar laughed.
He jumped up to grab her, but she ran into the bedroom
and shut the door. He rubbed his chin with the back of his
hand and looked at the door. Then he shrugged and picked
up the two bottles of wine.
“Milkman?” Hagar stuck her head out the door. “Come in
here.”
He turned around and put the bottles down on the table.
The door was open, but he couldn’t see her, could only hear
her laughing, a low private laugh as though she had won a
bet. He moved so quickly he forgot to duck the green sack
hanging from the ceiling. A hickey was forming on his
forehead by the time he got to her. “What you all got in
there?” he asked her.
“That’s Pilate’s stuff. She calls it her inheritance.” Hagar
was unbuttoning her blouse.“What’d she inherit? Bricks?” Then he saw her breasts.
“This is what I do in the meantime,” she said.
Their tossing and giggling had been free and open then
and they began to spend as much time in Guitar’s room
when he was at work as Guitar himself did when he was
home. She became a quasi-secret but permanent fixture in
his life. Very much a tease, sometimes accommodating his
appetites, sometimes refusing. He never knew when or why
she would do either. He assumed Reba and Pilate knew,
but they never made any reference to the change in his
relationship to Hagar. While he had lost some of his twelve-
year-old’s adoration of her, he was delighted to be sleeping
with her and she was odd, funny, quirky company, spoiled,
but artlessly so and therefore more refreshing than most of
the girls his own age. There were months when Hagar
would not see him, and then he’d appear one day and she
was all smiles and welcome.
After about three years or so of Hagar’s on-again-off-
again passion, her refusals dwindled until finally, by the time
he’d hit his father, they were nonexistent. Furthermore, she
began to wait for him, and the more involved he got with the
other part of his social life, the more reliable she became.
She began to pout, sulk, and accuse him of not loving her
or wanting to see her anymore. And though he seldom
thought about his age, she was very aware of hers.Milkman had stretched his carefree boyhood out for thirty-
one years. Hagar was thirty-six—and nervous. She placed
duty squarely in the middle of their relationship; he tried to
think of a way out.
He paid the clerk for the presents he had chosen and left
the drugstore, having made up his mind to call it off.
I’ll remind her that we are cousins, he thought. He would
not buy her a present at all; instead he would give her a
nice piece of money. Explain that he wanted her to get
something really nice for herself, but that his gift-giving was
compromising her. That he was not what she needed. She
needed a steady man who could marry her. He was
standing in her way. And since they were related and all,
she should start looking for someone else. It hurt him, he
would say, deeply hurt him, after all these years, but if you
loved somebody as he did her, you had to think of them
first. You couldn’t be selfish with somebody you loved.
Having thought so carefully of what he would say to her,
he felt as though he had already had the conversation and
had settled everything. He went back to his father’s office,
got some cash out of the safe, and wrote Hagar a nice
letter which ended: “Also, I want to thank you. Thank you for
all you have meant to me. For making me happy all these
years. I am signing this letter with love, of course, but more
than that, with gratitude.” And he did sign it with love, but it
was the word “gratitude” and the flat-out coldness of “thankyou” that sent Hagar spinning into a bright blue place where
the air was thin and it was silent all the time, and where
people spoke in whispers or did not make sounds at all,
and where everything was frozen except for an occasional
burst of fire inside her chest that crackled away until she ran
out into the streets to find Milkman Dead.
Long after he’d folded the money and the letter into an
envelope, Milkman sat on at his father’s desk. He added
and re-added columns of figures, always eighty cents too
little or eighty cents too much. He was still distracted and
edgy, and all of it was not because of the problem of Hagar.
He’d had a conversation with Guitar some time ago about
the dragnet. A young boy, about sixteen years old, on his
way home from school, had been strangled with what was
believed to be a rope, and his head was bashed in. The
state troopers cooperating with the local police said the
way in which the boy had been killed was similar to the way
another boy had been killed on New Year’s Eve in 1953,
and the way four grown men had been killed in 1955—the
strangulation, the smashing of the face. In the poolrooms
and in Tommy’s Barbershop, the word was that Winnie
Ruth Judd had struck again. The men laughed about it and
repeated for the benefit of newcomers the story of how, in
1932, Winnie Ruth, a convicted murderer, who axed and
dismembered her victims and stuffed them in trunks, was
committed to a state asylum for the criminally insane, and
escaped two or three times each year.Once she had walked two hundred miles through two
states before they caught her. Because there was a brutal
killing in the city in December of that year, during the time
Winnie Ruth was at large, Southside people were
convinced that she had done it. From then on when some
particularly nasty murder was reported, the Negroes said it
was Winnie Ruth. They said that because Winnie Ruth was
white and so were the victims. It was their way of explaining
what they believed was white madness—crimes planned
and executed in a truly lunatic manner against total
strangers. Such murders could only be committed by a
fellow lunatic of the race and Winnie Ruth Judd fit the
description. They believed firmly that members of their own
race killed one another for good reasons: violation of
another’s turf (a man is found with somebody else’s wife);
refusal to observe the laws of hospitality (a man reaches
into his friend’s pot of mustards and snatches out the
meat); or verbal insults impugning their virility, honesty,
humanity, and mental health. More important, they believed
the crimes they committed were legitimate because they
were committed in the heat of passion: anger, jealousy,
loss of face, and so on. Bizarre killings amused them,
unless of course the victim was one of their own.
They speculated about Winnie Ruth’s motives for this
recent murder. Somebody said she was raunchy from
being cooped up and went looking for a lay. But she knew
better than to expect a grown man to want her, so she went
for a schoolboy. Another said she probably didn’t likesaddle shoes and when she got out of the loony bin and
walked four hundred miles to safety, the first thing she saw
was a kid wearing saddle shoes and she couldn’t take it—
ran amok.
Amid the jokes, however, was a streak of unspoken
terror. The police said there had been a witness who
thought he saw a “bushy-haired Negro” running from the
schoolyard where the body was found.
“The same bushy-haired Negro they saw when Sam
Sheppard axed his wife,” said Porter.
“Hammered, man,” said Guitar. “Twenty-seven hammer
blows.”
“Great Jesus. Why he do twenty-seven? That’s a hard
killin.”
“Every killing is a hard killing,” said Hospital Tommy.
“Killing anybody is hard. You see those movies where the
hero puts his hands around somebody’s neck and the
victim coughs a little bit and expires? Don’t believe it, my
friends. The human body is robust. It can gather strength
when it’s in mortal danger.”
“You kill anybody in the war, Tommy?”
“I put my hand to a few.”“With your hands?”
“Bayonet, friend. The men of the Ninety-second used
bayonets. Belleau Wood glittered with them. Fairly
glittered.”
“How’d it feel?”
“Unpleasant. Extremely unpleasant. Even when you know
he’ll do the same to you, it’s still a very indelicate thing to
do.”
They laughed as usual at Tommy’s proper way of
speaking.
“That’s because you didn’t want to be in the army no
way,” said a fat man. “What about if you was roaming the
streets and met up with Orval Faubus?”
“Boy, I’d love to kill that sucker,” a heavy-set man said.
“Keep saying that. They’ll soon have your ass downtown.”
“My hair ain’t bushy.”
“They’ll make it bushy.”
“They’ll take some brass knuckles and make your head
bushy and call it hair.”Aside from Empire State’s giggle, which was
wholehearted, it had seemed to Milkman then that the
laughter was wan and nervous. Each man in that room
knew he was subject to being picked up as he walked the
street and whatever his proof of who he was and where he
was at the time of the murder, he’d have a very
uncomfortable time being questioned.
And there was one more thing. For some time Milkman
had been picking up hints that one or more of these
murders had in fact been either witnessed or committed by
a Negro. Some slip, someone knowing some detail about
the victim. Like whether or not Winnie Ruth couldn’t stand
saddle shoes. Did the boy have on saddle shoes? Did the
newspaper say so? Or was that just one of the fanciful
details a good jokester would think of.
The two Tommys were cleaning up. “Closed,” they said
to a man who poked his face in the door. “Shop’s closing.”
The conversation died down and the men who were just
hanging around seemed reluctant to go. Guitar too, but
finally he slipped on his jacket, shadow-boxed with Empire
State, and joined Milkman at the door. Southside shops
were featuring feeble wreaths and lights, made more feeble
by the tacky Yuletide streamers and bells the city had strung
up on the lampposts. Only downtown were the lights large,
bright, festive, and full of hope.
The two men walked down Tenth Street, headed forGuitar’s room.
“Freaky,” said Milkman. “Some freaky shit.”
“Freaky world,” said Guitar. “A freaky, fucked-up world.”
Milkman nodded. “Railroad Tommy said the boy had on
saddle shoes.”
“Did he?” Guitar asked.
“Did he? You know he did. You were laughing right along
with the rest of us.”
Guitar glanced at him. “What you opening your nose for?”
“I know when I’m being put off.”
“Then that’s what it is, man. Nothing else. Maybe I don’t
feel like discussing it.”
“You mean you don’t feel like discussing it with me. You
were full of discussion in Tommy’s.”
“Look, Milk, we’ve been tight a long time, right? But that
don’t mean we’re not different people. We can’t always
think the same way about things. Can’t we leave it like that?
There are all kinds of people in this world. Some are
curious, some ain’t; some talk, some scream; some are
kickers and other people are kicked. Take your daddy,now. He’s a kicker. First time I laid eyes on him, he was
kicking us out of our house. That was a difference right
there between you and me, but we got to be friends
anyway….”
Milkman stopped and forced Guitar to stop too and turn
around. “I know you’re not going to give me a bullshit
lecture.”
“No lecture, man. I’m trying to tell you something.”
“Well, tell me. Don’t give me no fuckin bullshit lecture.”
“What do you call a lecture?” asked Guitar. “When
 you
don’t talk for two seconds? When you have to listen to
somebody else instead of talk? Is that a lecture?”
“A lecture is when somebody talks to a thirty-one-year-
old man like he’s a ten-year-old kid.”
“You want me to talk or not?”
“Go ahead. Talk. Just don’t talk to me in that funny tone.
Like you a teacher and I’m some snot-nosed kid.”
“That’s the problem, Milkman. You’re more interested in
my tone than in what I’m saying. I’m trying to say that we
don’t have to agree on everything; that you and me are
different; that—”“You mean you got some secret shit you don’t want me to
know about.”
“I mean there are things that interest me that don’t
interest you.”
“How you know they don’t interest me?”
“I know you. Been knowing you. You got your high-tone
friends and your picnics on Honoré Island and you can
afford to spend fifty percent of your brainpower thinking
about a piece of ass. You got that red-headed bitch and
you got a Southside bitch and no telling what in between.”
“I don’t believe it. After all these years you putting me
down because of where I live?”
“Not where you live—where you hang out. You don’t live
nowhere. Not Not Doctor Street
 or
 Southside.”
“You begrudge me—”
“I don’t begrudge you a thing.”
“You’re welcome everywhere I go. I’ve tried to get you to
come to Honoré—”
“Fuck Honoré! You hear me? The only way I’ll go to that
nigger heaven is with a case of dynamite and a book of
matches.”“You used to like it.”
“I never liked it! I went with you, but I never liked it. Never.”
“What’s wrong with Negroes owning beach houses?
What do you want, Guitar? You mad at every Negro who
ain’t scrubbing floors and picking cotton. This ain’t
Montgomery, Alabama.”
Guitar looked at him, first in rage, and then he began to
laugh. “You’re right, Milkman. You have never in your life
said a truer word. This definitely is not Montgomery,
Alabama. Tell me. What would you do if it was? If this
turned out to be another Montgomery?”
“Buy a plane ticket.”
“Exactly. Now you know something about yourself you
didn’t know before: who you are and what you are.”
“Yeah. A man that refuses to live in Montgomery,
Alabama.”
“No. A man that can’t live there. If things ever got tough,
you’d melt. You’re not a serious person, Milkman.”
“Serious is just another word for miserable. I know all
about serious. My old man is serious. My sisters are
serious. And nobody is more serious than my mother.She’s so serious, she wasting away. I was looking at her in
the backyard the other day. It was as cold as a witch’s tit
out there, but she had to get some bulbs in the ground
before the fifteenth of December, she said. So there she
was on her knees, digging holes in the ground.”
“So? I miss the point.”
“The point is that she wanted to put those bulbs in. She
didn’t have to. She likes to plant flowers. She really likes it.
But you should have seen her face. She looked like the
unhappiest woman in the world. The most miserable. So
where’s the fun? I’ve never in my whole life heard my
mother laugh. She smiles sometimes, even makes a little
sound. But I don’t believe she has ever laughed out loud.”
Without the least transition and without knowing he was
going to, he began to describe to Guitar a dream he had
had about his mother. He called it a dream because he
didn’t want to tell him it had really happened, that he had
really seen it.
He was standing at the kitchen sink pouring the rest of
his coffee down the drain when he looked through the
window and saw Ruth digging in the garden. She made
little holes and tucked something that looked like a small
onion in them. As he stood there, mindlessly watching her,
tulips began to grow out of the holes she had dug. First a
solitary thin tube of green, then two leaves opened up fromthe stem—one on each side. He rubbed his eyes and
looked again. Now several stalks were coming out of the
ground behind her. Either they were bulbs she had already
planted or they had been in the sack so long they had
germinated. The tubes were getting taller and taller and
soon there were so many of them they were pressing up
against each other and up against his mother’s dress. And
still she didn’t notice them or turn around. She just kept
digging. Some of the stems began to sprout heads, bloody
red heads that bobbed over and touched her back. Finally
she noticed them, growing and nodding and touching her.
Milkman thought she would jump up in fear—at least
surprise. But she didn’t. She leaned back from them, even
hit out at them, but playfully, mischievously. The flowers
grew and grew, until he could see only her shoulders above
them and her flailing arms high above those bobbing,
snapping heads. They were smothering her, taking away
her breath with their soft jagged lips. And she merely
smiled and fought them off as though they were harmless
butterflies.
He knew they were dangerous, that they would soon suck
up all the air around her and leave her limp on the ground.
But she didn’t seem to guess this at all. Eventually they
covered her and all he could see was a mound of tangled
tulips bent low over her body, which was kicking to the last.
He described all of that to Guitar as though the dream
emphasized his point about the dangers of seriousness.He tried to be as light-hearted as possible in the telling, but
at the end, Guitar looked him in the eyes and said, “Why
didn’t you go help her?”
“What?”
“Help her. Pull her out from underneath.”
“But she liked it. She was having fun. She liked it.”
“Are you sure?” Guitar was smiling.
“Sure I’m sure. It was my dream.”
“It was
 your
 mother too.”
“Aw, man, why you making something out of it that ain’t
there? You’re making the whole thing into something
superserious, just to prove your point. First I’m wrong for not
living in Alabama. Then I’m wrong for not behaving right in
my own dream. Now I’m wrong for dreaming it. You see
what I mean? The least little thing is a matter of life and
death to you. You’re getting to be just like my old man. He
thinks if a paper clip is in the wrong drawer, I should
apologize. What’s happening to everybody?”
“Looks like everybody’s going in the wrong direction but
you, don’t it?”
Milkman swallowed. He remembered that long-agoevening after he hit his father how everybody was crammed
on one side of the street, going in the direction he was
coming from. Nobody was going his way. It was as though
Guitar had been in that dream too.
“Maybe,” he said. “But I know where I’m going.”
“Where?”
“Wherever the party is.”
Guitar smiled. His teeth were as white as the snowflakes
that were settling on his jacket. “Merry Christmas,” he said,
“and Happy New Year.” He waved his hand and cut around
the corner to his street. He was lost in the snowy shadows
of Southside before Milkman could ask him where he was
going or tell him to wait.
Now he closed the accounts book in Sonny’s Shop and
gave up on the column of numbers. Something was
happening to Guitar, had already happened to him. He was
constantly chafing Milkman about how he lived, and that
conversation was just one more example of how he’d
changed. No more could Milkman run up the stairs to his
room to drag him off to a party or a bar. And he didn’t want
to talk about girls or getting high. Sports were about the
only things he was still enthusiastic about, and music. Other
than that, he was all gloom and golden eyes. And politics.
It was that atmosphere of earnestness he provoked thatled Milkman to talking about his family more than he would
normally do and that also led him to defend with flippant
remarks the kind of life he led. Pussy and Honoré parties.
Guitar knew that wasn’t all he was interested in, didn’t he?
He knew Milkman had other interests. Such as? he asked
himself. Well, he was very good in his father’s business, for
one thing. Excellent, in fact. But he had to admit right away
that real estate was of no real interest to him. If he had to
spend the rest of his life thinking about rents and property,
he’d lose his mind. But he was going to spend the rest of
his life doing just that, wasn’t he? That’s what his father
assumed and he supposed that was what he had assumed
as well.
Maybe Guitar was right—partly. His life was pointless,
aimless, and it was true that he didn’t concern himself an
awful lot about other people. There was nothing he wanted
bad enough to risk anything for, inconvenience himself for.
Still, what right had Guitar to talk? He didn’t live in
Montgomery either; all he did was work at that automobile
factory and sneak off places—nobody knew where—and
hang around Tommy’s Barbershop. He never kept a
woman more than a few months—the time span that he
said was average before she began to make “permanent-
arrangement-type noises.”
He ought to get married, Milkman thought. Maybe I
should too. Who? There were lots of women around and he
was very much the eligible bachelor to the Honoré crowd.Maybe he’d pick one—the redhead. Get a nice house. His
father would help him find one. Go into a real partnership
with his father and…And what? There had to be something
better to look forward to. He couldn’t get interested in
money. No one had ever denied him any, so it had no
exotic attraction. Politics—at least barbershop politics and
Guitar’s brand—put him to sleep. He was bored.
Everybody bored him. The city was boring. The racial
problems that consumed Guitar were the most boring of all.
He wondered what they would do if they didn’t have black
and white problems to talk about. Who would they be if they
couldn’t describe the insults, violence, and oppression that
their lives (and the television news) were made up of? If
they didn’t have Kennedy or Elijah to quarrel about? They
excused themselves for everything. Every job of work
undone, every bill unpaid, every illness, every death was
The Man’s fault. And Guitar was becoming just like them—
except he made no excuses for himself—just agreed, it
seemed to Milkman, with every grievance he heard.
Milkman went into the bathroom, which served also as a
pantry, and plugged in the hot plate to make himself some
instant coffee. While he was there, he heard a rapid
tapping on the windowpane. He stepped back into the
office and saw Freddie’s eyes through the lettering.
Milkman unlocked the door.
“Hey, Freddie. What’s up?”“Looking for a warm spot. They got me runnin tonight.
Christmas comin and all, all I do is run up and down the
street.” Freddie’s janitor duties at the department store
were supplemented by his function as a messenger and
package deliverer.
“They give you a new truck yet?” Milkman asked him.
“You crazy? The engine have to fall out on the ground
before they give me a decent one.”
“I put some coffee water on. Have a cup?”
“Just what I’m lookin for. Saw your lights and thought
there’s got to be a hot cup a coffee in there. You wouldn’t
happen to have a little taste to go in it, would ya?”
“Just so happens I do.”
“Atta boy.”
Milkman went into the bathroom, lifted the lid from the
toilet tank, and took out the half-pint bottle he kept hidden
from Macon, who wouldn’t have alcohol on the premises.
He brought the bottle into the office, put it on the desk, and
went back to make up two cups of coffee. When he
reentered, Freddie was trying to look as though he hadn’t
already turned the pint up to his mouth. They laced their
coffee and Milkman looked around for his cigarettes.“Hard times, boy,” Freddie said absently, after his first
sip. “Hard times.” Then, as though he noticed something
missing, he asked, “Where’s your buddy?”
“You mean Guitar?”
“Yeah. Guitar. Where’s he?”
“Haven’t seen him in a few days. You know Guitar. He’ll
disappear on you in a minute.” Milkman noticed how white
Freddie’s hair was.
“How old are you, Freddie?”
“Who knows? They made dirt in the morning and me that
afternoon.” He giggled. “But I been around a long long
time.”
“You born her?”
“Naw. Down south. Jacksonville, Florida. Bad country,
boy. Bad, bad country. You know they ain’t even got an
orphanage in Jacksonville where colored babies can go?
They have to put ’em in jail. I tell people that talk about them
sit-ins I was
 raised
 in jail, and it don’t scare me none.”
“I didn’t know you were an orphan.”
“Well, not a regular orphan. I had people and all, but my
mama died and nobody would take me in. It was onaccount of the way she died that nobody would take me.”
“How’d she die?”
“Ghosts.”
“Ghosts?”
“You don’t believe in ghosts?”
“Well”—Milkman smiled—“I’m willing to, I guess.”
“You better believe, boy. They’re here.”
“Here?” Milkman didn’t glance around the office, but he
wanted to. The wind howled outside in the blackness and
Freddie, looking like a gnome, flashed his gold teeth. “I
don’t mean in this room necessarily. Although they could
be.” He cocked his head and listened. “No. I mean they in
the world.”
“You’ve seen some?”
“Plenty. Plenty. Ghosts killed my mother. I didn’t see that,
of course, but I seen ’em since.”
“Tell me about them.”
“No I ain’t. I don’t do no talkin ‘bout the ghosts I seen.
They don’t like that.”“Well, tell me about the one you didn’t see. The one killed
your mother.”
“Oh. Well. That one. She was walking cross the yard with
this neighbor friend of hers and they both looked up and
saw a woman comin down the road. They stopped and
waited to see who she was. When the woman got near, the
neighbor called out howdy and soon’s she said the word,
the woman turned into a white bull. Right before their eyes.
My
 mama fell down on the ground in labor pain right then
and there. When I was born and they showed me to her,
she screamed and passed out. Never
 did
 come to.
 My
father died two months before I was born, and they couldn’t
get none of my people and nobody else to take a baby
brought here by a white bull.”
Milkman started laughing. He didn’t mean to hurt
Freddie’s feelings, but he couldn’t stop the laughter, and
the more he tried, the more it came.
Freddie looked more surprised than hurt. “You don’t
believe me, do you?”
Milkman couldn’t answer, he was laughing so hard.
“Okay,” Freddie said, and threw up his hands. “Okay,
laugh on. But they’s a lot of strange things you don’t know
nothin about, boy. You’ll learn. Lot of strange things.
Strange stuff goin on right in this here town.”Milkman’s laughter was under control now. “What? What
strange stuff is happening in this town? I haven’t seen any
white bulls lately.”
“Open your eyes. Ask your buddy. He knows.”
“What buddy?”
“Your buddy Guitar. Ask him what strange stuff been
happenin. Ask him how come he runnin round with Empire
State all of a sudden.”
“Empire State?”
“That’s right. Empire State.”
“Nobody runs around with Empire State. He’s a nut. He
just stands around with a broom, dribbling spit. He can’t
even talk.”
“He
 don’t
 talk. That don’t mean he can’t. Only reason he
don’t is cause he found his wife in bed with another man
long time ago, and ain’t found nothing to say since then.”
“Well, what’s Guitar doing with him?”
“Good question. Police would like to know the answer to
that too.”
“How’d you get from Empire State to the police?”“You ain’t heard? People say the police is lookin for a
colored man what killed that white boy in the schoolyard.”
“I know that. Everybody knows that.”
“Well, the description fits State. And Guitar been takin
him places. Hidin him, I believe.”
“What’s so strange about that? You know Guitar is like
that. He’ll hide anybody the law is looking for. He hates
white people, especially cops, and anybody they’re after
can count on him for help.”
“You don’t understand. Him and State ain’t actin like they
just hidin him. They actin like he did it.”
“You a little drunk, Freddie?”
“Yeah, I’m a little drunk, but that don’t change nothin.
Look here. Remember when Emmet Till was killed? Back
in fifty-three? Well, right after that, a white boy was killed in
the schoolyard, wasn’t he?”
“I don’t know. I can’t remember the dates of murders I
haven’t committed.”
“You don’t know?” Freddie was incredulous.
“No. Are you saying State did it?”“I’m sayin he acts like it and I’m sayin Guitar knows, and
I’m sayin somethin strange is goin on. That’s what I’m
sayin.”
He’s mad at me, thought Milkman, because I laughed at
his mother and that white bull story. So he’s trying to get
back at me.
“Keep your eyes open,” Freddie went on. “Just keep
them open.” He looked in the pint bottle, saw it was empty,
and got up to leave. “Yep. Some strange goings on round
here. But don’t put my name in it if you hear anything. Was
just like this when that insurance man jumped off the roof.
Ever hear tell of him?”
“Seems like I did.”
“That must a been when you was a little bitty baby, 1931.
Well, it was some strange stuff then too.” Freddie buttoned
his coat and pulled his flap-eared cap down as far as it
would go. “Well, thanks for the coffee, boy. Did me a lot of
good. A lot of good.” He took his gloves out of his pocket
and moved to the door.
“You’re welcome, Freddie. Merry Christmas if I don’t see
you before that.”
“Same to you. And your folks. Tell Mr. Dead and your
mother I said Merry Christmas.” He was smiling again.
When he reached the door he put on his gloves. Then heturned his head slowly and faced Milkman. “Tell you
somebody else might know about what’s goin on.
Corinthians. Ask Corinthians.”
He flashed his gold merrily and was gone.Chapter 5
Nothing happened to the fear. He lay in Guitar’s bed face-
up in the sunlight, trying to imagine how it would feel when
the ice pick entered his neck. But picturing a spurt of wine-
red blood and wondering if the ice pick would make him
cough didn’t help. Fear lay like a pair of crossed paws on
his chest.
He closed his eyes and threw his arm over his face to
keep the light from overexposing his thoughts. In the
darkness that his arm made he could see ice picks coming
down faster than raindrops had when he tried as a little boy
to catch them with his tongue.
Five hours ago, before he knocked on Guitar’s door, he
had stood on the top step, dripping in the summer rain that
still patted the window, imagining that the drops were tiny
steely picks. Then he knocked on the door.
“Yeah?” The voice was lightly aggressive; Guitar never
opened his door to a knock anymore before finding out who
it was.
“Me–Milkman,” he answered, and waited for the clicking
sounds of three locks being released.
Milkman walked in, hunching his shoulders under his wetsuit jacket. “Anything to drink?”
“Now, you know better’n that.” Guitar was smiling, his
golden eyes dimmed for the moment. They had not seen
much of each other since that argument about Honoré
versus Alabama, but the quarrel had been cleansing for
both of them. They were easy with each other now that they
didn’t have to pretend. When in conversation they came to
the battleground of difference, their verbal sparring was full
of good humor. Furthermore, their friendship had been
tested in more immediate ways. The last six months had
been dangerous for Milkman, and Guitar had come to his
aid over and over again.
“Coffee, then,” said Milkman. He sat on the bed with the
heaviness of a very old man. “How long you gonna keep
that up?”
“Forever. It’s over, man. No booze. How about some
tea?”
“Jesus.”
“Loose too. Bet you thought tea grew in little bags.”
“Oh, Christ.”
“Like Louisiana cotton. Except the black men picking it
wear diapers and turbans. All over India that’s all you see.
Bushes with little bitsy white tea bags blossoming. Right?”“Gimme the tea, Guitar. Just the tea. No geography.”
“No geography? Okay, no geography. What about some
history in your tea? Or some sociopolitico—No. That’s still
geography. Goddam, Milk, I do believe my whole life’s
geography.”
“Don’t you wash pots out for people before you cook
water in them?”
“For example, I live in the North now. So the first question
come to mind is North of what? Why, north of the South. So
North exists because South does. But does that mean
North is different from South? No way! South is just south of
North….”
“You don’t put the fuckin leaves in the boiling water. You
pour the water
 over
 the leaves. In a pot, man. In a teapot!”
“But there is some slight difference worth noticing.
Northerners, for example—born and bred ones, that is—
are picky about their food. Well, not about the food. They
actually don’t give a shit about the food. What they’re picky
about is the trappings. You know what I mean? The pots
and shit. Now, they’re real funny about pots. But tea? They
don’t know Earl Grey from old man Lipton’s instant.”
“I want tea, man. Not won-ton shredded wheat.”“Old man Lipton dye him up some shredded
 New York
Times
 and put it in a cute little white bag and northern
Negroes run amok. Can’t contain themselves. Ever notice
that? How they love them little white bags?”
“Oh, Jesus.”
“He’s a Northerner too. Lived in Israel, but a Northerner in
His heart. His bleeding heart. His cute little old bleeding red
heart. Southerners think they own Him, but that’s just
because the first time they laid eyes on Him, He was strung
up on a tree. They can relate to that, see. Both the stringer
and the strung. But Northerners know better….”
“Who you talking about? Black people or white people?”
“Black? White? Don’t tell me you’re one of those racial
Negroes? Who said anything about black people? This is
just a geography lesson.” Guitar handed Milkman a
steaming cup of tea.
“Yeah, well, if this is tea, I’m a soft-fried egg.”
“See what I mean? Picky. Why you got to be a
 soft
-fried
egg? Why can’t you be just a fried egg? Or just a plain old
egg? And why a egg anyway? Negro’s been a lotta things,
but he ain’t never been no egg.”
Milkman began to laugh. Guitar had done it again. He’d
come to the door sopping wet, ready to roll over and die,and now he was laughing, spilling tea, and choking out his
reply: “How come? How come a nigger can’t be a egg? He
can be a egg if he wants to.”
“Nope. Can’t be no egg. It ain’t in him. Something about
his genes. His genes won’t let him be no egg no matter
how hard he tries. Nature says no. ‘No, you can’t be no egg,
nigger. Now, you can be a crow if you wanna. Or a big
baboon. But not no egg. Eggs is difficult, complicated.
Fragile too. And white.’”
“They got brown eggs.”
“Miscegenation. Besides, don’t nobody want ’em.”
“French people do.”
“In France, yeah. But not in the Congo. Frenchman in the
Congo won’t touch a brown egg.”
“Why won’t he?”
“Scared of ’em. Might do something to his skin. Like the
sun.”
“French people love the sun. They’re always trying to get
in the sun. On the Riviera—”
“They try to get in the French sun, but not the Congo sun.
In the Congo they hate the sun.”“Well, I got a right to be what I want to be, and I want to be
a egg.”
“Fried?”
“Fried.”
“Then somebody got to bust your shell.”
Quicker than a pulse beat, Guitar had changed the air.
Milkman wiped his mouth, avoiding Guitar’s eyes because
he knew the phosphorus was back in them. The little room
stood at attention in the quiet. It was a second-story porch
walled in to make a room-for-rent so the landlady could get
an income from it and have a watchman too. Its outside
stairway made it perfect for a bachelor. Especially a
secretive one like Guitar Bains.
“Can I have the pad tonight?” Milkman asked him. He
examined his fingernails.
“To cop?”
Milkman shook his head.
Guitar didn’t believe him. Didn’t believe his friend really
wanted to be alone the night before the day of his own
murder. “That’s scary, man. Very scary.”
Milkman didn’t answer.“You’re not obliged to go through no number, you know.
Not for me. Everybody knows you’re brave when you want
to be.”
Milkman looked up but still did not answer.
“Still and all,” Guitar went on carefully, “you might get your
heart cut out. Then you’ll be just another brave nigger what
got wasted.”
Milkman reached for the Pall Mall package. It was empty,
so he pulled a longish butt from the Planter’s peanut butter
jar top that was Guitar’s ashtray for the day. He stretched
out on the bed, letting his long fingers rub the pocket places
in his clothes where matches might be. “Everything’s cool,”
he said.
“Shit,” said Guitar. “Ain’t nothing cool. Nothing, nowhere.
Even the North Pole ain’t cool. You think so, go on up there
and watch them fuckin glaciers ice your ass. And what the
glaciers don’t get the polar bears will.” Guitar stood up, his
head almost touching the ceiling. Annoyed by Milkman’s
indifference, he relieved his agitation by straightening up
the room. He pulled an empty crate from underneath the
straight-backed chair leaning in the corner, and started
dumping trash into the box: dead matches from the window
sill, pork bones from the barbecue he had eaten the day
before. He crumpled the pleated paper cups that had beenoverflowing with cole slaw and fired them into the crate.
“Every nigger I know wants to be cool. There’s nothing
wrong with controlling yourself, but can’t nobody control
other people.” He looked sideways at Milkman’s face, alert
for any sign, any opening. This kind of silence was new.
Something must have happened. Guitar was genuinely
worried about his friend, but he also didn’t want anything to
happen in his room that would bring the police there. He
picked up the peanut-butter-top ashtray.
“Wait. There’s still some good butts in there.” Milkman
spoke softly.
Guitar dumped the whole ashtray into the box.
“What’d you do that for? You know we don’t have no
cigarettes.”
“Then move your ass and go get some.”
“Come on, Guitar. Cut the shit.” Milkman rose from the
bed and reached for the crate. He would have gotten it
except Guitar stepped back and flung it all the way across
the room, letting the mess settle right back where it came
from. Graceful and economical as a cat, he arced his arm
out of the swing and slammed his fist up against the wall,
forming a barrier to any move Milkman might make.
“Pay attention.” Guitar’s voice was low. “Pay attention
when I’m trying to tell you something.”Head to head, toe to toe they stood. Milkman’s left foot
hovered above the floor, and Guitar’s eyes with their
phosphorous lights singed his heart a little, but he took the
stare. “And if I don’t? What then, man? You gonna do me
in? My name is Macon, remember? I’m already Dead.”
Guitar didn’t smile at the familiar joke, but there was
enough recognition of it in his face to soften the glare in his
eyes.
“Somebody ought to tell your murderer that,” said Guitar.
Milkman gave a short laugh and moved back toward the
bed. “You worry too much, Guitar.”
“I worry just enough. But right now I need to know how
come you ain’t worried at all. You come up here knowing
it’s the thirtieth day. Knowing if anybody wants to find you
they come here if not first then last. And you ask me to
leave you by yourself. Just tell me what you doing.”
“Look,” Milkman said. “Out of all those times, I was
scared just twice: the first time and the third. I’ve been
handling it ever since, right?”
“Yeah, but something’s funny this time.”
“Ain’t nothing funny.”“Yeah, it is. You. You funny.”
“No I’m not. Just tired. Tired of dodging crazy people,
tired of this jive town, of running up and down these streets
getting nowhere….”
“Well, you’re home free if tired is all you are. Soon you’ll
have all the rest you ever need. Can’t promise you the
bed’s comfortable, but morticians don’t make mattresses.”
“Maybe she won’t come this time.”
“She ain’t missed in six months. You countin on her
taking a holiday or something?”
“I can’t hide from that bitch no more. I got to stop it. I don’t
want to go through this again a month from now.”
“Why don’t you get her people to do something?”
“I am her people.”
“Listen, Milk, I’ll split if you say so. But just listen to me a
minute. That broad had a Carlson skinning knife last time.
You know how sharp a Carlson skinning knife is? Cut you
like a laser, man.”
“I know.”
“No, you don’t know. You was up under the bar when meand Moon grabbed her.”
“I know what she had.”
“Won’t be no Moon in this room tomorrow. And no Guitar
either, if I listen to you. This time she might have a pistol.”
“What fool is gonna give a colored woman a pistol?”
“Same fool that gave Porter a shotgun.”
“That was years ago.”
“It ain’t even that that bothers me. It’s the way you acting.
Like you want it. Like you looking forward to it.”
“Where’d you think that up?”
“Look at you. You all dressed up.”
“I had to work in Sonny’s Shop. You know my old man
makes me dress up like this when I’m behind the desk.”
“You had time to change. It’s past midnight.”
“Okay. So I’m clean. So I’m looking forward to it. I just got
through telling you I don’t want to hide no more….”
“It’s a secret, ain’t it? You got yourself a secret.”
“That makes two of us.”“Two? You and her?”
“No. You and me. You’ve been making some funny
smoke screens lately.” Milkman looked up at Guitar and
smiled. “Just so you don’t think I ain’t noticed.”
Guitar grinned back. Now that he knew there was a
secret, he settled down into the groove of their relationship.
“Okay, Mr. Dead, sir. You on your own. Would you ask
your visitor to kind of neaten things up a little before she
goes? I don’t want to come back and have to look through a
pile of cigarette butts for your head. Be nice if it was laying
somewhere I could spot it right off. And if it’s her head that’s
left behind, well, there’s some towels in the closet on the
shelf in the back.”
“Rest your mind, boy. Ain’t nobody giving up no head.”
They laughed then at the suitableness of the unintended
pun, and it was in the sound of this laughter that Guitar
picked up his brown leather jacket and started out the door.
“Cigarettes!” Milkman called after him. “Bring me some
cigarettes before you disappear.”
“Gotcha!” Guitar was halfway down the stairs. Already his
thoughts had left Milkman and had flown ahead to the
house where six old men waited for him.He didn’t come back that night.
Milkman lay quietly in the sunlight, his mind a blank, his
lungs craving smoke. Gradually his fear of and eagerness
for death returned. Above all he wanted to escape what he
knew, escape the implications of what he had been told.
And all he knew in the world about the world was what other
people had told him. He felt like a garbage pail for the
actions and hatreds of other people. He himself did
nothing. Except for the one time he had hit his father, he
had never acted independently, and that act, his only one,
had brought unwanted knowledge too, as well as some
responsibility for that knowledge. When his father told him
about Ruth, he joined him in despising her, but he felt put
upon; felt as though some burden had been given to him
and that he didn’t deserve it. None of that was his fault, and
he didn’t want to have to think or be or do something about
any of it.
In that mood of lazy righteousness he wallowed in
Guitar’s bed, the same righteousness that had made him
tail his mother like a secret agent when she left the house a
week or so ago.
Returning home from a party, he had hardly pulled
Macon’s Buick up to the curb and turned off the car lights
when he saw his mother walking a little ahead of him down
Not Doctor Street. It was one-thirty in the morning, but in
spite of the hour and her turned-up coat collar, there was noair of furtiveness about her at all. She was walking in what
seemed to him a determined manner. Neither hurried nor
aimless. Just the even-paced walk of a woman on her way
to some modest but respectable work.
When Ruth turned the corner, Milkman waited a minute
and started up the car. Creeping, not letting the engine
slide into high gear, he drove around the corner. She was
standing at the bus stop, so Milkman waited in the shadows
until the bus came and she boarded it.
Surely this was no meeting of lovers. The man would
have picked her up nearby somewhere. No man would
allow a woman he had any affection for to come to him on
public transportation in the middle of the night, especially a
woman as old as Ruth. And what man wanted a woman
over sixty anyway?
Following the bus was a nightmare; it stopped too often,
too long, and it was difficult to tail it, hide, and watch to see
if she got off. Milkman turned on the car radio, but the
music, which he hoped would coat his nerve ends, only
splayed them. He was very nervous and thought seriously
about turning back.
Finally the bus pulled up at the intracounty train station. Its
last stop. There, among the few remaining passengers, he
saw her go into the lobby of the station. He believed he’d
lost her. He’d never find out what train she was taking. Hethought again of going back home. It was late, he was
exhausted, and he wasn’t sure he wanted to know any more
about his mother. But having come this far, he realized it
was foolish to turn back now and leave things forever up in
the air. He parked in the lot and walked slowly toward the
station. Maybe she’s not taking a train, he thought. Maybe
he meets her in the station.
He looked around carefully before pushing open the
doors. There was no sign of her inside. It was a small, plain
building. Old but well lit. Looming over the modest waiting
room was the Great Seal of Michigan, in vivid Technicolor,
painted, probably, by some high school art class. Two pink
deer reared up on their hind legs, facing each other, and an
eagle perched at eye level between them. The eagle’s
wings were open and looked like raised shoulders. Its head
was turned to the left; one fierce eye bored into that of a
deer. Purple Latin words stretched in a long ribbon beneath
the seal:
 Si Quaeris Peninsulam Amoenam Circumspice.
Milkman didn’t understand the Latin and he didn’t
understand why the wolverine state had a buck painted on
the seal. Or were they does? He remembered Guitar’s
story about killing one. “A man shouldn’t do that.” Milkman
felt a quick beat of something like remorse, but he shook it
off and resumed his search for his mother. He walked to the
back of the station. Still no sight of her. Then he noticed that
there was an upper platform, stairs leading to it, and an
arrow with the words FAIR FIELD AND NORTHEASTERN
SUBURBS painted on it. Perhaps she was up there. Hemoved cautiously toward the stairs, glancing up and all
around lest he see her or miss her. A loudspeaker broke
the silence, announcing the arrival of the two-fifteen train to
Fairfield Heights, leaving from the upper platform. He
dashed up the stairs then just in time to see Ruth step into a
car, and to jump into another car himself.
The train made ten stops at about ten-minute intervals.
He leaned out between the cars at each stop to see if she
was getting off. After the sixth stop, he asked the conductor
when the next train returned to the city. “Five forty-five a.m.,”
he said.
Milkman looked at his watch. It was already three o’clock.
When the conductor called out, “Fairfield Heights. Last
stop,” a half hour later, Milkman looked out again and this
time he saw her disembark. He darted behind the three-
sided wooden structure that sheltered waiting passengers
from the wind until he heard her wide rubber heels padding
down the steps.
Beyond the shelter along the street below were stores—
all closed now: newsstands, coffee shops, stationery
shops, but no houses. The wealthy people of Fairfield did
not live near a train station and very few of their houses
could even be seen from the road. Nevertheless, Ruth
walked in her even-paced way down the street and in just a
few minutes was at the wide winding lane that led into
Fairfield Cemetery.As Milkman stared at the ironwork arched over the
entrance, he remembered snatches of his mother’s chatter
about having looked so very carefully for a cemetery for the
doctor’s body—someplace other than the one where
Negroes were all laid together in one area. And forty years
ago Fairfield was farm country with a county cemetery too
tiny for anybody to care whether its dead were white or
black.
Milkman leaned against a tree and waited at the
entrance. Now he knew, if he’d had any doubts, that all his
father had told him was true. She was a silly, selfish, queer,
faintly obscene woman. Again he felt abused. Why couldn’t
anybody in his whole family just be normal?
He waited for an hour before she came out.
“Hello, Mama,” he said. He tried to make his voice sound
as coolly cruel as he felt; just as he tried to frighten her by
stepping out suddenly from behind the tree.
He succeeded. She stumbled in alarm and took a great
gulp of air into her mouth.
“Macon! Is that you? You’re here? Oh, my goodness. I…”
She tried desperately to normalize the situation, smiling
wanly and blinking her eyes, searching for words and
manners and civilization.Milkman stopped her. “You come to lay down on your
father’s grave? Is that what you’ve been doing all these
years? Spending a night every now and then with your
father?”
Ruth’s shoulders seemed to slump, but she said in a
surprisingly steady voice, “Let’s walk toward the train stop.”
Neither said a word during the forty-five minutes they
waited in the little shelter for the train back to the city. The
sun came up and pointed out the names of young lovers
painted on the wall. A few men were walking up the stairs to
the platform.
When the train backed in from its siding they still had not
spoken. Only when the wheels were actually turning and the
engine had cleared its throat did Ruth begin, and she
began in the middle of a sentence as though she had been
thinking it all through since she and her son left the entrance
to Fairfield Cemetery.
“…because the fact is that I am a small woman. I don’t
mean little; I mean small, and I’m small because I was
pressed small. I lived in a great big house that pressed me
into a small package. I had no friends, only schoolmates
who wanted to touch my dresses and my white silk
stockings. But I didn’t think I’d ever need a friend because I
had him. I was small, but he was big. The only person who
ever really cared whether I lived or died. Lots of peoplewere
 interested
 in whether I lived or died, but he cared. He
was not a good man, Macon. Certainly he was an arrogant
man, and often a foolish and destructive one. But he cared
whether and he cared how I lived, and there was, and is, no
one else in the world who ever did. And for that I would do
anything. It was important for me to be in his presence,
among his things, the things he used, had touched. Later it
was just important for me to know that he was in the world.
When he left it, I kept on reigniting that cared-for feeling that
I got from him.
“I am not a strange woman. I am a small one.
“I don’t know what all your father has told you about me
down in that shop you all stay in. But I know, as well as I
know my own name, that he told you only what was flattering
to him. I know he never told you that he killed my father and
that he tried to kill you. Because both of you took my
attention away from him. I know he never told you that. And I
know he never told you that he threw my father’s medicine
away, but it’s true. And I couldn’t save my father. Macon
took away his medicine and I just didn’t know it, and I
wouldn’t have been able to save you except for Pilate.
Pilate was the one brought you here in the first place.”
“Pilate?” Milkman was coming awake. He had begun
listening to his mother with the dulled ear of someone who
was about to be conned and knew it.“Pilate. Old, crazy, sweet Pilate. Your father and I hadn’t
had physical relations since my father died, when Lena and
Corinthians were just toddlers. We had a terrible quarrel.
He threatened to kill me. I threatened to go to the police
about what he had done to my father. We did neither. I
guess my father’s money was more important to him than
the satisfaction of killing me. And I would have happily died
except for my babies. But he did move into another room
and that’s the way things stayed until I couldn’t stand it
anymore. Until I thought I’d really die if I had to live that way.
With nobody touching me, or even looking as though they’d
like to touch me. That’s when I started coming to Fairfield.
To talk. To talk to somebody who wanted to listen and not
laugh at me. Somebody I could trust. Somebody who
trusted me. Somebody who was…interested in me. For my
own self. I didn’t care if that somebody was under the
ground. You know, I was twenty years old when your father
stopped sleeping in the bed with me. That’s hard, Macon.
Very hard. By the time I was thirty think I was just afraid I’d
die that way.
“Then Pilate came to town. She came into this city like
she owned it. Pilate, Reba, and Reba’s little baby. Hagar.
Pilate came to see Macon right away and soon as she saw
me she knew what my trouble was. And she asked me one
day, ‘Do you want him?’ ‘I want somebody,’ I told her. ‘He’s
as good as anybody,’ she said. ‘Besides, you’ll get
pregnant and your baby ought to be his. He ought to have a
son. Otherwise this be the end of us.’“She gave me funny things to do. And some greenish-
gray grassy-looking stuff to put in his food.” Ruth laughed. “I
felt like a doctor, like a chemist doing some big important
scientific experiment. It worked too. Macon came to me for
four days. He even came home from his office in the middle
of the day to be with me. He looked puzzled, but he came.
Then it was over. And two months later I was pregnant.
When he found out about it, he immediately suspected
Pilate and he told me to get rid of the baby. But I wouldn’t
and Pilate helped me stand him off. I wouldn’t have been
strong enough without her. She saved my life. And yours,
Macon. She saved yours too. She watched you like you
were her own. Until your father threw her out.”
Milkman leaned his head against the cold handbar that
was attached to the seat in front of him. He held it there,
letting its chill circle his head. Then he turned to his mother.
“Were you father when he was dead? Naked?”
“No. But I did kneel there in my slip at his bedside and
kiss his beautiful fingers. They were the only part of him that
wasn’t…”
“You nursed me.”
“Yes.”
“Until I was…old. Too old.”Ruth turned toward her son. She lifted her head and
looked deep into his eyes. “And I also prayed for you. Every
single night and every single day. On my knees. Now you
tell me. What harm did I do you on my knees?”
That was the beginning. Now it was all going to end. In a
little while she would walk in the door and this time he would
let her do it. Afterward there would be no remembrance of
who he was or where. Of Magdalene called Lena and First
Corinthians, of his father trying to stop him dead before he
was born. Of the brilliant bitterness between his father and
his mother, a bitterness as smooth and fixed as steel. And
he wouldn’t have those waking dreams or hear those awful
words his mother had spoken to him: What harm? What
harm did I do you on my knees?
He could hear her footsteps, and then the sound of the
doorknob turning, sticking, and turning again. He knew,
without uncovering his eyes, that she was right there,
looking at him through the window.
Hagar. Killing, ice-pick-wielding Hagar, who, shortly after
a Christmas thank-you note, found herself each month
searching the barrels and cupboards and basement
shelves for some comfortably portable weapon with which
to murder her true love.
The “thank you” cut her to the quick, but it was not the
reason she ran scurrying into cupboards looking forweapons. That had been accomplished by the sight of
Milkman’s arms around the shoulders of a girl whose silky
copper-colored hair cascaded over the sleeve of his coat.
They were sitting in Mary’s, smiling into glasses of Jack
Daniel’s on the rocks. The girl looked a little like
Corinthians or Lena from the back, and when she turned,
laughing, toward Milkman, and Hagar saw her gray eyes,
the fist that had been just sitting in her chest since
Christmas released its forefinger like the blade of a
skinning knife. As regularly as the new moon searched for
the tide, Hagar looked for a weapon and then slipped out of
her house and went to find the man for whom she believed
she had been born into the world. Being five years older
than he was and his cousin as well did nothing to dim her
passion. In fact her maturity and blood kinship converted
her passion to fever, so it was more affliction than affection.
It literally knocked her down at night, and raised her up in
the morning, for when she dragged herself off to bed,
having spent another day without his presence, her heart
beat like a gloved fist against her ribs. And in the morning,
long before she was fully awake, she felt a longing so bitter
and tight it yanked her out of a sleep swept clean of
dreams.
She moved around the house, onto the porch, down the
streets, to the fruit stalls and the butchershop, like a restless
ghost, finding peace nowhere and in nothing. Not in the first
tomato off the vine, split open and salted lightly, which her
grandmother put before her. Not the six-piece set of pinkglass dishes Reba won at the Tivoli Theater. And not the
carved wax candle that the two of them made for her, Pilate
dipping the wick and Reba scratching out tiny flowers with a
nail file, and put in a genuine store-bought candleholder
next to her bed. Not even the high fierce sun at noon, nor
the ocean-dark evenings. Nothing could pull her mind away
from the mouth Milkman was not kissing, the feet that were
not running toward him, the eye that no longer beheld him,
the hands that were not touching him.
She toyed, sometimes, with her unsucked breasts, but at
some point her lethargy dissipated of its own accord and in
its place was wilderness, the focused meanness of a flood
or an avalanche of snow which only observers, flying in a
rescue helicopter, believed to be an indifferent natural
phenomenon, but which the victims, in their last gulp of
breath, knew was both directed and personal. The
calculated violence of a shark grew in her, and like every
witch that ever rode a broom straight through the night to a
ceremonial infanticide as thrilled by the black wind as by
the rod between her legs; like every fed-up-to-the-teeth
bride who worried about the consistency of the grits she
threw at her husband as well as the potency of the lye she
had stirred into them; and like every queen and every
courtesan who was struck by the beauty of her emerald ring
as she tipped its poison into the old red wine, Hagar was
energized by the details of her mission. She stalked him.
Whenever the fist that beat in her chest became that
pointing finger, when any contact with him at all was betterthan none, she stalked him. She could not get his love (and
the possibility that he did not think of her at all was
intolerable), so she settled for his fear.
On those days, her hair standing out from her head like a
thundercloud, she haunted Southside and Not Doctor
Street until she found him. Sometimes it took two days, or
three, and the people who saw her passed the word along
that Hagar “done took off after Milkman again.” Women
watched her out of their windows. Men looked up from their
checker games and wondered if she’d make it this time.
The lengths to which lost love drove men and women never
surprised them. They had seen women pull their dresses
over their heads and howl like dogs for lost love. And men
who sat in doorways with pennies in their mouths for lost
love. “Thank God,” they whispered to themselves, “thank
God I ain’t never had one of them graveyard loves.” Empire
State himself was a good example of one. He’d married a
white girl in France and brought her home. Happy as a fly
and just as industrious, he lived with her for six years until
he came home to find her with another man. Another black
man. And when he discovered that his white wife loved not
only him, not only this other black man, but the whole race,
he sat down, closed his mouth, and never said another
word. Railroad Tommy had given him a janitor’s job to save
him from the poorhouse, workhouse, or nuthouse, one.
So Hagar’s forays were part and parcel of the mystery of
having been “lifed” by love, and while the manifestation ittook was a source of great interest to them, the
consequences were not. After all, it served him right,
messing with his own cousin.
Luckily for Milkman, she had proved, so far, to be the
world’s most inept killer. Awed (even in the midst of her
anger) by the very presence of her victim, she trembled
violently and her knife thrusts and hammer swings and ice-
pick jabs were clumsy. As soon as the attempt had been
thwarted by a wrist grab from behind or a body tackle from
the front or a neat clip on the jaw, she folded up into herself
and wept cleansing tears right there and later under Pilate’s
strap—to which she submitted with relief. Pilate beat her,
Reba cried, and Hagar crouched. Until the next time. Like
this time when she turned the doorknob of Guitar’s little
bachelor room.
It was locked. So she swung one leg over the porch
railing and fiddled with the window. Milkman heard the
noises, heard the window shake, but refused to move or
take his arm away from his eyes. Even when he heard the
tinkle and clatter of glass he did not move.
Hagar put her shoe back on before reaching into the
window hole she had made and turning the catch. It took
her the longest time to raise the window. She was hanging
lopsided over the railing, one leg supporting her weight.
The window slid in a crooked path up its jamb.Milkman refused to look. Perspiration collected in the
small of his back and ran out of his armpit down his side.
But the fear was gone. He lay there as still as the morning
light, and sucked the world’s energy up into his own will.
And willed her dead. Either she will kill me or she will drop
dead. Either I am to live in this world on my terms or I will
die out of it. If I am to live in it, then I want her dead. One or
the other. Me or her. Choose.
Die, Hagar. Die. Die. Die.
But she didn’t. She crawled into the room and walked
over to the little iron bed. In her hand was a butcher knife,
which she raised high over her head and brought down
heavily toward the smooth neck flesh that showed above
his shirt collar. The knife struck his collarbone and angled
off to his shoulder. A small break in the skin began to
bleed. Milkman jerked, but did not move his arm nor open
his eyes. Hagar raised the knife again, this time with both
hands, but found she could not get her arms down. Try as
she might, the ball joint in her shoulders would not move.
Ten seconds passed. Fifteen. The paralyzed woman and
the frozen man.
At the thirtieth second Milkman knew he had won. He
moved his arm and opened his eyes. His gaze traveled to
her strung-up, held-up arms.
Oh, she thought, when she saw his face, I had forgottenhow beautiful he is.
Milkman sat up, swung his legs over the side of the bed,
and stood.
“If you keep your hands just that way,” he said, “and then
bring them down straight, straight and fast, you can drive
that knife right smack in your cunt. Why don’t you do that?
Then all your problems will be over.” He patted her cheek
and turned away from her wide, dark, pleading, hollow
eyes.
She stood that way for a long time, and it was an even
longer time before anybody found her. They could have
guessed where she was, though. If anybody missed her for
a while they could guess. Even Ruth knew now. A week
earlier she had learned from Freddie that Hagar had tried
to kill Milkman six times in as many months. She stared at
his golden teeth and said, “Hagar?” She hadn’t laid eyes on
her in years; had been to Pilate’s house only once in her life
—a very long time ago.
“Hagar?”
“Hagar. Shore Hagar.”
“Does Pilate know?”
“Course she do. Whip her every time, but it don’t do no
good.”Ruth was relieved. For a moment she imagined that
Pilate, who had brought her son to life in the first place, was
now bound to see him dead. But right after that moment of
relief, she felt hurt because Milkman had not told her
himself. Then she realized that he really didn’t tell her
anything, and hadn’t for years. Her son had never been a
person to her, a separate real person. He had always been
a passion. Because she had been so desperate to lie with
her husband and have another baby by him, the son she
bore was first off a wished-for bond between herself and
Macon, something to hold them together and reinstate their
sex lives. Even before his birth he was a strong feeling—a
feeling about the nasty greenish-gray powder Pilate had
given her to be stirred into rain water and put into food. But
Macon came out of his few days of sexual hypnosis in a
rage and later when he discovered her pregnancy, tried to
get her to abort. Then the baby became the nausea caused
by the half ounce of castor oil Macon made her drink, then a
hot pot recently emptied of scalding water on which she sat,
then a soapy enema, a knitting needle (she inserted only
the tip, squatting in the bathroom, crying, afraid of the man
who paced outside the door), and finally, when he punched
her stomach (she had been about to pick up his breakfast
plate, when he looked at her stomach and punched it), she
ran to Southside looking for Pilate. She had never walked
through that part of town, but she knew the street Pilate
lived on, though not the house. Pilate had no telephone and
no number on her house. Ruth had asked some passer-bywhere Pilate lived and was directed to a lean brown house
set back from the unpaved road. Pilate was sitting on a
chair; Reba was cutting Pilate’s hair with a barber’s
clippers. That was the first time she saw Hagar, who was
four or five years old then. Chubby, with four long braids,
two like horns over each ear, two like tails at the back of her
neck. Pilate comforted Ruth, gave her a peach, which Ruth
could not eat because the fuzz made her sick. She listened
to what Ruth said and sent Reba to the store for a box of
Argo cornstarch. She sprinkled a little of it into her hand
and offered it to Ruth, who obediently took a lump and put it
in her mouth. As soon as she tasted it, felt its crunchiness,
she asked for more, and ate half a box before she left.
(From then on she ate cornstarch, cracked ice, nuts, and
once in a fit she put a few tiny pebbles of gravel in her
mouth. “When you expectin, you have to eat what the baby
craves,” Pilate said, “’less it come in the world hongry for
what you denied it.” Ruth could not bite enough. Her teeth
were on edge with the yearning. Like the impulse of a cat to
claw, she searched for crunchy things, and when there was
nothing, she would grind her teeth.)
Gnashing the cornstarch, Ruth let Pilate lead her into the
bedroom, where the woman wrapped her in a homemade-
on-the-spot girdle—tight in the crotch—and told her to keep
it on until the fourth month and “don’t take no more mess off
Macon and don’t ram another thing up in your womb.” She
also told her not to worry. Macon wouldn’t bother her no
more; she, Pilate, would see to it. (Years later Ruth learnedthat Pilate put a small doll on Macon’s chair in his office. A
male doll with a small painted chicken bone stuck between
its legs and a round red circle painted on its belly. Macon
knocked it out of the chair and with a yardstick pushed it
into the bathroom, where he doused it with alcohol and
burned it. It took nine separate burnings before the fire got
down to the straw and cotton ticking of its insides. But he
must have remembered the round fire-red stomach, for he
left Ruth alone after that.)
When the baby was born the day after she stood in the
snow, with cloth roses at her feet and a man with blue wings
above her head, she regarded him as a beautiful toy, a
respite, a distraction, a physical pleasure as she nursed
him—until Freddie (again Freddie) caught her at it; then he
was no longer her velveteened toy. He became a plain on
which, like the cowboys and Indians in the movies, she and
her husband fought. Each one befuddled by the values of
the other. Each one convinced of his own purity and
outraged by the idiocy he saw in the other. She was the
Indian, of course, and lost her land, her customs, her
integrity to the cowboy and became a spread-eagled
footstool resigned to her fate and holding fast to tiny
irrelevant defiances.
But who was this son of hers? This tall man who had flesh
on the outside and feelings on the inside that she knew
nothing of, but somebody did, knew enough about him to
want to kill him. Suddenly, the world opened up for her likeone of her imperial tulips and revealed its evil yellow pistil.
She had been husbanding her own misery, shaping it,
making of it an art and a Way. Now she saw a larger, more
malevolent world outside her own. Outside the fourposter
bed where Doctor had bubbled and rotted (all but his
beautiful hands, which were the only things his grandson
had inherited). Outside her garden and the fishbowl where
her goldfish died. She had thought it was all done. That she
had won out over the castor oil, and the pot of steam that
had puckered and burned her skin so she could not bear to
urinate or sit with her daughters at the table where they cut
and sewed. She had had the baby anyway, and although it
did nothing to close the break between herself and Macon,
there he was, her single triumph.
Now Freddie was telling her that it wasn’t done and over
yet. Somebody was still trying to kill him. To deprive her of
the one aggressive act brought to royal completion. And the
person who was threatening his life was someone who
shared Macon’s blood.
“That hurts,” she said aloud to Freddie as she folded into
her pocket the rent money he handed her. “That hurts, you
know.”
She climbed the porch steps and went into the kitchen.
Without knowing what her foot was planning to do, she
kicked the cabinet door with the worn lock under the sink. It
answered her kick with a tiny whine before it sneaked openagain. Ruth looked at it and kicked it closed once more.
Again it whined and opened right back up.
“I want you closed,” she whispered. “Closed.”
The door stayed open.
“Closed. You hear me? Closed. Closed. Closed.” She
was screaming by now.
Magdalene called Lena, hearing her shouts, ran down
the stairs and into the kitchen. She found her mother staring
at the sink and commanding it.
“Mother?” Lena was frightened. Ruth looked up at her.
“What is it?”
Ruth looked up at her. “What is it?”
“I don’t know…. I thought I heard you saying something.”
“Get somebody to fix that door. I want it shut. Tight.”
Lena stared as Ruth hurried past and when she heard
her mother running up the stairs, she put her fingers to her
lips in disbelief. Ruth was sixty-two years old. Lena had no
idea she could move that fast.
Her passions were narrow but deep. Long deprived of
sex, long dependent on self-manipulation, she saw herson’s imminent death as the annihilation of the last
occasion she had been made love to.
With the same determined tread that took her to the
graveyard six or seven times a year, Ruth left the house and
caught the number 26 bus and sat down right in back of the
driver. She took her glasses off and wiped them on the hem
of her skirt. She was serene and purposeful as always
when death turned his attention to someone who belonged
to her, as she was when death breathed in her father’s
wispy hair and blew the strands about. She had the same
calmness and efficiency with which she cared for the
doctor, putting her hand on death’s chest and holding him
back, denying him, keeping her father alive even past the
point where he wanted to be alive, past pain on into disgust
and horror at having to smell himself in his next breath. Past
that until he was too sick to fight her efforts to keep him
alive, lingering in absolute hatred of this woman who would
not grant him peace, but kept her shining lightish eyes fixed
on him like magnets holding him from the narrow earth he
longed for.
Ruth wiped her glasses clean so she could see the street
signs as they passed (“Eat cherries,” Pilate had told her,
“and you won’t have to wear them little windows over your
eyes”), her mind empty except for getting there—to Darling
Street, where Pilate lived and where, she supposed, Hagar
lived too. How had that chubby little girl weighed down with
hair become a knife-wielding would-be killer out to get herson? Maybe Freddie lied. Maybe. She’d see.
When the banks disappeared and small shops in
between rickety houses came into view, Ruth pulled the
cord. She stepped down and walked toward the underpass
that cut across Darling Street. It was a long walk and she
was sweating by the time she got to Pilate’s house. The
door was open, but nobody was inside. The house smelled
fruity and she remembered how the peach had nauseated
her the last time she was there. Here was the chair she had
collapsed in. There the candlemaker’s rack, the pan where
Pilate’s homemade soap hardened into a yellowish-brown
slab. This house had been a haven then, and in spite of the
cold anger she felt now, it still looked like an inn, a safe
harbor. A flypaper roll entirely free of flies curled down from
the ceiling not far from a sack that hung there too. Ruth
looked into the bedroom and saw three little beds, and like
Goldilocks, she walked over to the nearest one and sat
down. There was no back door to this two-room house, just
a big room where they lived and this bedroom. It had a
cellar that one could enter only from the outside under a
metal door that slanted away from the house and opened
onto stone stairs.
Ruth sat still, letting the anger and determination jell. She
wondered whose bed it was and lifted up the blanket and
saw only mattress ticking. The same was true of the next
bed, but not of the third. It had sheets, a pillow, and a pillow
slip. That would be Hagar’s, she thought. The anger unjelledand flooded through her. She left the room, pressing her
fury back so she would be able to wait and wait until
somebody returned. Pacing the floor of the outer room, her
elbows in the palms of her hands, she suddenly heard
humming that seemed to be coming from the back of the
house. Pilate, she thought. Pilate hummed and chewed
things all the time. Ruth would ask her first if what Freddie
said was true. She needed Pilate’s calm view, her honesty
and equilibrium. Then she would know what to do. Whether
to unfold her arms and let the rage out to do whatever it
might, or…She tasted again the Argo cornstarch and felt
the marvelous biting and crunching it allowed her. Now she
merely ground her teeth as she stepped out to the porch
and made her way around the side of the house through the
nicotiana growing all wild and out of control.
A woman sat on a bench, her hands clasped between
her knees. It was not Pilate. Ruth stood still and looked at
the woman’s back. It didn’t look like death’s back at all. It
looked vulnerable, soft, like an easily wounded shin, full of
bone but susceptible to the slightest pain.
“Reba?” she said.
The woman turned around and fastened on her the most
sorrowful eyes Ruth had ever seen.
“Reba’s gone,” she said, the second word sounding as if
the going were permanent. “Can I do something for you?”“I’m Ruth Foster.”
Hagar stiffened. A lightning shot of excitement ran
through her. Milkman’s mother: the silhouette she had seen
through the curtains in an upstairs window on evenings
when she stood across the street hoping at first to catch
him, then hoping just to see him, finally just to be near the
things he was familiar with. Private vigils held at night,
made more private because they were expressions of
public lunacy. The outline she’d seen once or twice when
the side door opened and a woman shook crumbs from a
tablecloth or dust from a small rug onto the ground.
Whatever Milkman had told her about his mother, whatever
she had heard from Pilate and Reba, she could not
remember, so overwhelmed was she in the presence of
 his
mother. Hagar let her morbid pleasure spread across her
face in a smile.
Ruth was not impressed. Death always smiled. And
breathed. And looked helpless like a shinbone, or a tiny
speck of black on the Queen Elizabeth roses, or film on the
eye of a dead goldfish.
“You are trying to kill him.” Ruth’s voice was matter-of-
fact. “If you so much as bend a hair on his head, so help me
Jesus, I will tear your throat out.”
Hagar looked surprised. She loved nothing in the world
except this woman’s son, wanted him alive more thananybody, but hadn’t the least bit of control over the predator
that lived inside her. Totally taken over by her anaconda
love, she had no self left, no fears, no wants, no intelligence
that was her own. So it was with a great deal of
earnestness that she replied to Ruth. “I’ll to. But I can’t make
you a for-certain promise.”
Ruth heard the supplication in her words and it seemed
to her that she was not looking at a person but at an
impulse, a cell, a red corpuscle that neither knows nor
understands why it is driven to spend its whole life in one
pursuit: swimming up a dark tunnel toward the muscle of a
heart or an eye’s nerve end that it both nourished and fed
from.
Hagar lowered her eyelids and gazed hungrily down the
figure of the woman who had been only a silhouette to her.
The woman who slept in the same house with him, and who
could call him home and he would come, who knew the
mystery of his flesh, had memory of him as long as his life.
The woman who knew him, had watched his teeth appear,
stuck her finger in his mouth to soothe his gums. Cleaned
his behind, Vaselined his penis, and caught his vomit in a
fresh white diaper. Had fed him from her own nipples,
carried him close and warm and safe under her heart, and
who had opened her legs far far wider than she herself ever
had for him. Who even now could walk freely into his room if
she wanted to and smell his clothes, stroke his shoes, and
lay her head on the very spot where he had lain his. Butwhat was more, so much more, this thin lemon-yellow
woman knew with absolute certainty what Hagar would
willingly have her throat torn out to know: that she would see
him this very day. Jealousy loomed so large in her it made
her tremble. Maybe you, she thought. Maybe it’s you I
should be killing. Maybe then he will come to me and let me
come to him. He is my home in this world. And then, aloud,
“He is my home in this world.”
“And I am his,” said Ruth.
“And he wouldn’t give a pile of swan shit for either one of
you.”
They turned then and saw Pilate leaning on the window
sill. Neither knew how long she’d been there.
“Can’t say as I blame him neither. Two growed-up
women talkin ‘bout a man like he was a house or needed
one. He ain’t a house, he’s a man, and whatever he need,
don’t none of you got it.”
“Leave me alone, Mama. Just leave me alone.”
“You already alone. If you want more alone, I can knock
you into the middle of next week, and leave you there.”
“You’re botherin me!” Hagar was shouting and digging
her fingers in her hair. It was an ordinary gesture of
frustration, but its awkwardness made Ruth know that therewas something truly askew in this girl. That here was the
wilderness of Southside. Not the poverty or dirt or noise,
not just extreme unregulated passion where even love
found its way with an ice pick, but the absence of control.
Here one lived knowing that at any time, anybody might do
anything. Not wilderness where there was system, or the
logic of lions, trees, toads, and birds, but wild wilderness
where there was none.
She had not recognized it in Pilate, whose equilibrium
overshadowed all her eccentricities and who was, in any
case, the only person she knew of strong enough to counter
Macon. Although Ruth had been frightened of her the first
time she saw her—when she knocked on the kitchen door
way back then, looking, as she said, for her brother Macon.
(Ruth was still frightened of her a little. Not just her short hair
cut regularly like a man’s, or her large sleepy eyes and busy
lips, or the smooth smooth skin, hairless, scarless, and
wrinkleless. For Ruth had actually seen it. The place on her
stomach where a navel should have been and was not.
Even if you weren’t frightened of a woman who had no
navel, you certainly had to take her very seriously.)
Now she held up her hand, imperiously, and silenced
Hagar’s whines.
“Sit down there. Sit down and don’t leave this yard.”
Hagar slumped and moved slowly back to her bench.Pilate turned her eyes to Ruth. “Come on in. Rest yourself
before you hop on that bus again.”
They sat down at the table facing each other.
“Peaches kind of dried up on me in this heat,” said
Pilate, and she reached for a peck basket which held about
a half dozen. “But there should be some good ones left in
here. Can I slice you up some?”
“No, thank you,” said Ruth. She was trembling a little now.
After the tension, the anger, the bravado of her earlier state
of mind, followed by the violence of Pilate’s words to her
granddaughter, this quiet social-tea tone disarmed her,
threw her too soon and too suddenly back into the
mannered dignity that was habitual for her. Ruth pressed
her hands together in her lap to stop the shaking.
They were so different, these two women. One black, the
other lemony. One corseted, the other buck naked under
her dress. One well read but ill traveled. The other had read
only a geography book, but had been from one end of the
country to another. One wholly dependent on money for life,
the other indifferent to it. But those were the meaningless
things. Their similarities were profound. Both were vitally
interested in Macon Dead’s son, and both had close and
supportive post-humous communication with their fathers.
“The last time I was here you offered me a peach. Myvisit was about my son then too.”
Pilate nodded her head and with her right thumbnail slit
the peach open.
“You won’t never be able to forgive her. For just tryin to
do it you won’t never be able to forgive her. But it looks to
me like you ought to be able to understand her. Think on it a
minute. You ready now to kill her—well, maim her anyway—
because she’s tryin to take him away from you. She’s the
enemy to you because she wants to take him out of your
life. Well, in her eyes there’s somebody who wants to take
him out of her life too—him. So he’s her enemy. He’s the
one who’s tryin to take himself out of her life. And she’ll kill
him before she lets him do that. What I’m sayin is that you
both got the same idea.
“I do my best to keep her from it. She’s my baby too, you
know, but I tear her up every time she try. Just for the tryin,
mind you, because I know one thing sure: she’ll never pull it
off. He come in the world tryin to keep from gettin killed.
Layin in your stomach, his own papa was tryin to do it. And
you helped some too. He had to fight off castor oil and
knittin needles and being blasted with hot steam and I don’t
know what all you and Macon did. But he made it. When he
was at his most helpless, he made it. Ain’t nothin goin to kill
him but his own ignorance, and won’t no woman ever kill
him. What’s likelier is that it’ll be a woman save his life.”“Nobody lives forever, Pilate.”
“Don’t?”
“Of course not.”
“Nobody?”
“Of course, nobody.”
“I don’t see why not.”
“Death is as natural as life.”
“Ain’t nothin natural about death. It’s the most unnatural
thing they is.”
“You think people should live forever?”
“Some people. Yeah.”
“Who’s to decide? Which ones should live and which
ones shouldn’t?”
“The people themselves. Some folks want to live forever.
Some don’t. I believe they decide on it anyway. People die
when they want to and if they want to. Don’t nobody have to
die if they don’t want to.”
Ruth felt a chill. She’d always believed that her father
wanted to die. “I wish I could count on your faith as far as myson was concerned. But I think I’d be a really foolish woman
if I did that. You saw your own father die, just like I did; you
saw him killed. Do you think he wanted to die?”
“I saw Papa shot. Blown off a fence five feet into the air. I
saw him wigglin on the ground, but not only did I not see
him die, I seen him since he was shot.”
“Pilate. You all buried him yourselves.” Ruth spoke as if
she were talking to a child.
“Macon did.”
“It’s the same thing.”
“Macon seen him too. After he buried him, after he was
blown off that fence. We both seen him. I see him still. He’s
helpful to me, real helpful. Tells me things I need to know.”
“What things?”
“All kinds of things. It’s a good feelin to know he’s around.
I tell you he’s a person I can always rely on. I tell you
somethin else. He’s the
 only
 one. I was cut off from people
early. You can’t know what that was like. After my papa was
blown off that fence, me and Macon wandered around for a
few days until we had a fallin out and I went off on my own. I
was about twelve, I think. When I cut out by myself, I headed
for Virginia. I thought I remembered that was where my
papa had people. Or my mother did. Seemed to me like Iremembered somebody sayin that. I don’t remember my
mother because she died before I was born.”
“Before
 you were born? How could she…?”
“She died and the next minute I was born. But she was
dead by the time I drew air. I never saw her face. I don’t
even know what her name was. But I do remember thinkin
she come from Virginia. Anyways, that’s where I struck out
for. I looked around for somebody to take me in, give me a
little work for a while so I could earn some money to get on
down there. I walked for seven days before I found a place
with a preacher’s family. A nice place except they made me
wear shoes. They sent me to school, though. A one-room
place, where everybody sat. I was twelve, but since this was
my first school I had to sit over there with the little bitty
children. I didn’t mind it too much; matter of fact, I liked a lot
of it. I loved the geography part. Learning about that made
me want to read. And the teacher was tickled at how much I
liked geography. She let me have the book and I took it
home with me to look at. But then the preacher started
pattin on me. I was so dumb I didn’t know enough to stop
him. But his wife caught him at it, thumbin my breasts, and
put me out. I took my geography book off with me. I could of
stayed in that town cause they was plenty of colored people
to take me in. In them days, anybody too old to work kept
the children. Grown folks worked and left their kids in other
people’s houses. But him being the preacher and all like
that, I figured I ought to make tracks. I was broke as a haintcause the place didn’t carry no wages. Just room and
board. So I just took my geography book and a rock I
picked up for a souvenir and lit out.
“It was a Sunday when I met up with some pickers. Folks
call ’em migrants nowadays; then they was just called
pickers. They took me in and treated me fine. I worked up
in New York State pickin beans, then we’d move to another
place and pick a different crop. Everyplace I went I got me
a rock. They was about four or five families all together in
the crew. All of them related one way or another. But they
was good people and treated me fine. I stayed with them
for three years, I believe, and the main reason I stayed on
was a woman there I took to. A root worker. She taught me
a lot and kept me from missin my own family, Macon and
Papa. I didn’t have a thought in my head of ever leavin
them, but I did. I had to. After a while they didn’t want me
around no more.” Pilate sucked a peach stone and her face
was dark and still with the memory of how she was “cut off”
so early from other people.
The boy. The nephew, or was it the cousin, of the woman
who worked roots. When she was fifteen, and the rain was
so heavy they had to stay in the shacks (those who had
them—the others had tents) because nothing could be
harvested in that pouring rain, the boy and Pilate lay down
together. He was no older than she was and while
everything about her delighted him, nothing about her
surprised him. So it was with no malice whatsoever thatone evening after supper he mentioned to some of the men
(but within listening distance of the women) that he didn’t
know that some folks had navels and some didn’t. The men
and the women raised their eyes at his remark, and asked
him to explain what he meant. He got it out, finally, after
many false starts—he thought they were alarmed because
he had taken the pretty girl with the single earring to bed—
but he soon discovered that the navel thing was what
bothered them.
The root woman was assigned the job of finding out if
what he said was true or not. She called Pilate into her
shack one day later. “Lay down,” she said. “I want to check
on something.” Pilate lay down on the straw pallet. “Now lift
up your dress,” the woman said. “More. All the way up.
Higher.” And then her eyes flew open wide and she put her
hand over her mouth. Pilate leaped up. “What? What is it?”
She looked down at herself, thinking a snake or a
poisonous spider had crawled over her legs.
“Nothin,” the woman said. Then, “Child, where’s your
navel?”
Pilate had never heard the word “navel” and didn’t know
what the woman was talking about. She looked down at her
legs, parted on the rough ticking. “Navel?” she asked.
“You know. This.” And the woman pulled up her own
dress and slipped the elastic of her bloomers down overher fat stomach. Pilate saw the little corkscrew thing right in
the middle, the little piece of skin that looked like it was
made for water to drain down into, like the little whirlpools
along the edges of a creek. It was just like the thing her
brother had on his stomach. He had one. She did not. He
peed standing up. She squatting down. He had a penis like
a horse did. She had a vagina like the mare. He had a flat
chest with two nipples. She had teats like the cow. He had
a corkscrew in his stomach. She did not. She thought it was
one more way in which males and females were different.
The boy she went to bed with had one too. But until now she
had never seen another woman’s stomach. And from the
horror on the older woman’s face she knew there was
something wrong with not having it.
“What’s it for?” she asked.
The woman swallowed. “It’s for … it’s for people who
were born natural.”
Pilate didn’t understand that, but she did understand the
conversation she had later with the root worker and some
other women in the camp. She was to leave. They were
very sorry, they liked her and all, and she was such a good
worker and a big help to everybody. But she had to leave
just the same.
“On account of my stomach?” But the women would not
answer her. They looked at the ground.Pilate left with more than her share of earnings, because
the women did not want her to go away angry. They thought
she might hurt them in some way if she got angry, and they
also felt pity along with their terror of having been in the
company of something God never made.
Pilate went away. Again she headed for Virginia. But
now she knew how to harvest in a team and looked for
another migrant crew, or a group of women who had
followed their men to some seasonal work as brickmakers,
iron workers, shipyard workers. In her three years picking,
she had seen a number of these women, their belongings
stuffed into wagons heading for the towns and cities that
sought out and transported black men to various crafts that
could be practiced only when the weather permitted. The
companies did not encourage the women to come—they
did not want an influx of poor colored settlers in those towns
—but the women came anyway and took jobs as domestics
and farm helpers in the towns, and lived wherever housing
was free or dirt cheap. But Pilate did not want a steady job
in a town where a lot of colored people lived. All her
encounters with Negroes who had established themselves
in businesses or trades in those small midwestern towns
had been unpleasant. Their wives did not like the trembling
unhampered breasts under her dress, and told her so. And
though the men saw many raggedy black children, Pilate
was old enough to disgrace them. Besides, she wanted to
keep moving.Finally she was taken on by some pickers heading
home, stopping for a week’s work here and there, wherever
they could find it. Again she took a man to bed, and again
she was expelled. Only this time there was no polite but firm
pronouncement, nor any generous share of profits. They
simply left her one day, moved out while she was in the
town buying thread. She got back to campground to find
nothing but a dying fire, a bag of rocks, and her geography
book propped up on a tree. They even took her tin cup.
She had six copper pennies, five rocks, the geography
book, and two spools of black thread—heavyweight No. 30.
Right there she knew she must decide on whether to get to
Virginia or settle in a town where she would probably have
to wear shoes. So she did both—the latter to make the
former possible. With the six pennies, the book, the rocks,
and the thread, she walked back to town. Black women
worked in numbers at two places in that town: the laundry
and, across the street from it, the hotel/ whorehouse. Pilate
chose the laundry and walked in, saying to the three young
girls elbow deep in water there, “Can I stay here tonight?”
“Nobody in here at night.”
“I know. Can I stay?”
They shrugged. The next day Pilate was hired as a
washer-woman at ten cents a day. She worked there, ate
there, slept there, and saved her dimes. Her hands, wellcalloused from years of harvesting, were stripped of their
toughness and became soft in the wash water. Before her
hands could get the different but equally tough skin of a
laundress, her knuckles split with the rubbing and wringing,
and ran blood into the rinse tubs. She almost ruined an
entire batch of sheets, but the other girls covered for her,
giving the sheets a second rinse.
One day she noticed a train steaming away from the
town. “Where does it go to?” she asked.
“South,” they said.
“How much does it cost?”
They laughed. “They freight trains,” they told her. Only two
passenger cars, and no colored allowed.
“Well, how do colored people get where they want to
go?”
“Ain’t supposed to go nowhere,” they said, “but if they do,
have to go by wagon. Ask at the livery stable when the next
wagon is going down. The livery people always know when
somebody is getting ready to take off.”
She did, and by the end of October, just before cold
weather set in, she was on her way to West Virginia, which
was close anyway, according to her geography book.
When she got to Virginia itself, she realized that she didn’tknow in what part of the state to look for her people. There
were more Negroes there than she’d ever seen, and the
comfort she felt in their midst she kept all her life.
Pilate had learned, whenever she was asked her name,
to give only her first name. The last name had a bad effect
on people. Now she was forced to ask if anybody knew of a
family called Dead. People frowned and said, “No, never
heard of any such.”
She was in Culpeper, Virginia, washing clothes in a
hotel, when she learned that there was a colony of Negro
farmers on an island off the coast of Virginia. They grew
vegetables, had cattle, made whiskey, and sold a little
tobacco. They did not mix much with other Negroes, but
were respected by them and self-sustaining. And you could
get to them only by boat. On a Sunday, she convinced the
ferryman to take her there, when his work was done, in his
skiff.
“What you want over there?” he asked.
“Work.”
“You don’t want to work over there,” he said.
“Why not?”
“Them folks keep to theyselves too much.”“Take me. I’ll pay.”
“How much?”
“A nickel.”
“Great Jesus! You on. Be here at nine-thirty.”
There were twenty-five or thirty families on that island and
when Pilate made it clear that she wasn’t afraid of work, but
didn’t like the mainland and the confinement of town, she
was taken in. She worked there for three months, hoeing,
fishing, plowing, planting, and helping out at the stills. All
she had to do, she thought, was keep her belly covered.
And it was true. At sixteen now, she took a lover from one
of the island families and managed to keep direct light from
ever hitting her stomach. She also managed to get
pregnant, and to the great consternation of the island
women, who were convinced their menfolk were the most
desirable on earth—which accounted for so much
intermarrying among them—Pilate refused to marry the
man, who was eager to take her for his wife. Pilate was
afraid that she wouldn’t be able to hide her stomach from a
husband forever. And once he saw that uninterrupted flesh,
he would respond the same way everybody else had. Yet,
incredible as they found her decision, nobody asked her to
leave. They watched over her and gave her fewer and
lighter chores as her time drew near. When her baby was
born, a girl, the two midwives in attendance were sopreoccupied with what was going on between her legs they
never even noticed her smooth balloon of a stomach.
The first thing the new mother looked for in her baby girl
was the navel, which she was relieved to see.
Remembering how she got the name that was folded in her
ear, when the nine days’ waiting was done she asked one
of the women for a Bible. There was a hymnal, they said,
but not a Bible on the island. Everybody who wanted to go
to services had to go to the mainland.
“Can you tell me a nice name for a girl that’s in the
Bible?” Pilate asked.
“Oh, plenty,” they said, and reeled off a score, from which
she chose Rebecca and shortened it to Reba.
It was right after Reba was born that her father came to
her again. Pilate had become extremely depressed and
lonely after the birth. The baby’s father was forbidden to
see her, since she had not “healed” yet, and she spent
some dark lonely hours along with the joyous ones with the
baby. Clear as day, her father said, “Sing. Sing,” and later
he leaned in at the window and said, “You just can’t fly on
off and leave a body.”
Pilate understood all of what he told her. To sing, which
she did beautifully, relieved her gloom immediately. And
she knew he was telling her to go back to Pennsylvania andcollect what was left of the man she and Macon had
murdered. (The fact that she had struck no blow was
irrelevant. She was part of her brother’s act, because, then,
she and he were one.) When the child was six months old,
she asked the mother of the baby’s father to keep it, and
left the island for Pennsylvania. They tried to discourage her
because it was getting to be winter, but she paid them no
attention.
A month later she returned with a sack, the contents of
which she never discussed, which she added to her
geography book and the rocks and the two spools of
thread.
When Reba was two years old, Pilate was seized with
restlessness. It was as if her geography book had marked
her to roam the country, planting her feet in each pink,
yellow, blue or green state. She left the island and began
the wandering life that she kept up for the next twenty-
some-odd years, and stopped only after Reba had a baby.
No place was like the island ever again. Having had one
long relationship with a man, she sought another, but no
man was like that island man ever again either.
After a while, she stopped worrying about her stomach,
and stopped trying to hide it. It occurred to her that although
men fucked armless women, one-legged women,
hunchbacks and blind women, drunken women, razor-toting
women, midgets, small children, convicts, boys, sheep,dogs, goats, liver, each other, and even certain species of
plants, they were terrified of fucking her—a woman with no
navel. They froze at the sight of that belly that looked like a
back; became limp even, or cold, if she happened to
undress completely and walked straight toward them,
showing them, deliberately, a stomach as blind as a knee.
“What are you? Some kinda
 mer
maid?” one man had
shouted, and reached hurriedly for his socks.
It isolated her. Already without family, she was further
isolated from her people, for, except for the relative bliss on
the island, every other resource was denied her:
partnership in marriage, confessional friendship, and
communal religion. Men frowned, women whispered and
shoved their children behind them. Even a traveling side
show would have rejected her, since her freak quality
lacked that important ingredient—the grotesque. There was
really nothing to see. Her defect, frightening and exotic as it
was, was also a theatrical failure. It needed intimacy,
gossip, and the time it took for curiosity to become drama.
Finally Pilate began to take offense. Although she was
hampered by huge ignorances, but not in any way
unintelligent, when she realized what her situation in the
world was and would probably always be she threw away
every assumption she had learned and began at zero. First
off, she cut her hair. That was one thing she didn’t want to
have to think about anymore. Then she tackled the problemof trying to decide how she wanted to live and what was
valuable to her. When am I happy and when am I sad and
what is the difference? What do I need to know to stay
alive? What is true in the world? Her mind traveled crooked
streets and aimless goat paths, arriving sometimes at
profundity, other times at the revelations of a three-year-old.
Throughout this fresh, if common, pursuit of knowledge, one
conviction crowned her efforts: since death held no terrors
for her (she spoke often to the dead), she knew there was
nothing to fear. That plus her alien’s compassion for
troubled people ripened her and—the consequence of the
knowledge she had made up or acquired—kept her just
barely within the boundaries of the elaborately socialized
world of black people. Her dress might be outrageous to
them, but her respect for other people’s privacy—which
they were all very intense about—was balancing. She
stared at people, and in those days looking straight into
another person’s eyes was considered among black
people the height of rudeness, an act acceptable only with
and among children and certain kinds of outlaws—but she
never made an impolite observation. And true to the palm
oil that flowed in her veins, she never had a visitor to whom
she did not offer food before one word of conversation—
business or social—began. She laughed but never smiled
and in 1963, when she was sixty-eight years old, she had
not shed a tear since Circe had brought her cherry jam for
breakfast.
She gave up, apparently, all interest in table manners orhygiene, but acquired a deep concern for and about human
relationships. Those twelve years in Montour County, where
she had been treated gently by a father and a brother, and
where she herself was in a position to help farm animals
under her care, had taught her a preferable kind of
behavior. Preferable to that of the men who called her
mermaid and the women who swept up her footprints or put
mirrors on her door.
She was a natural healer, and among quarreling drunks
and fighting women she could hold her own, and
sometimes mediated a peace that lasted a good bit longer
than it should have because it was administered by
someone not like them. But most important, she paid close
attention to her mentor—the father who appeared before
her sometimes and told her things. After Reba was born, he
no longer came to Pilate dressed as he had been on the
woods’ edge and in the cave, when she and Macon had left
Circe’s house. Then he had worn the coveralls and heavy
shoes he was shot in. Now he came in a white shirt, a blue
collar, and a brown peaked cap. He wore no shoes (they
were tied together and slung over his shoulder), probably
because his feet hurt, since he rubbed his toes a lot as he
sat near her bed or on the porch, or rested against the side
of the still. Along with winemaking, cooking whiskey
became the way Pilate began to make her steady living.
That skill allowed her more freedom hour by hour and day
by day than any other work a woman of no means
whatsoever and no inclination to make love for money couldchoose. Once settled in as a small-time bootlegger in the
colored section of a town, she had only occasional police
or sheriff problems, for she allowed none of the activities
that often accompanied wine houses—women, gambling—
and she more often than not refused to let her customers
drink what they bought from her on the premises. She
made and sold liquor. Period.
After Reba grew up and began to live from one orgasm
to another, taking time out to produce one child, Hagar,
Pilate thought it might be time for a change. Not because of
Reba, who was quite content with the life her mother and
she lived, but because of her granddaughter. Hagar was
prissy. She hated, even as a two-year-old, dirt and
disorganization. At three she was already vain and
beginning to be proud. She liked pretty clothes. Astonished
as Pilate and Reba were by her wishes, they enjoyed trying
to fulfill them. They spoiled her, and she, as a favor to their
indulgence, hid as best she could the fact that they
embarrassed her.
Pilate decided to find her brother, if he was still alive, for
the child, Hagar, needed family, people, a life very different
from what she and Reba could offer, and if she
remembered anything about Macon, he would be different.
Prosperous, conventional, more like the things and people
Hagar seemed to admire. In addition, Pilate wanted to
make peace between them. She asked her father where he
was, but he just rubbed his feet and shook his head. So forthe first time, Pilate went voluntarily to the police, who sent
her to the Red Cross, who sent her to the Salvation Army,
who sent her to the Society of Friends, who sent her back
to the Salvation Army, who wrote to their command posts in
large cities from New York to St. Louis and from Detroit to
Louisiana and asked them to look in the telephone
directory, where in fact one captain’s secretary found him
listed. Pilate was surprised that they were successful, but
the captain was not, because there could hardly be many
people with such a name.
They made the trip in style (one train and two buses), for
Pilate had a lot of money; the crash of 1929 had produced
so many buyers of cheap home brew she didn’t even need
the collection the Salvation Army took up for her. She
arrived with suitcases, a green sack, a full-grown daughter,
and a granddaughter, and found her brother truculent,
inhospitable, embarrassed, and unforgiving. Pilate would
have moved on immediately except for her brother’s wife,
who was dying of lovelessness then, and seemed to be
dying of it now as she sat at the table across from her
sister-in-law listening to her life story, which Pilate was
making deliberately long to keep Ruth’s mind off Hagar.Chapter 6
“I took her home. She was standing in the middle of the
room when I got there. So I just took her home. Pitiful.
Really pitiful.”
Milkman shrugged. He didn’t want to talk about Hagar,
but it was a way to sit Guitar down and get around to asking
him something else.
“What’d you do to her?” asked Guitar.
“What’d I do to
 her?
 You saw her with a butcher knife and
you ask me that?”
“I mean before. That’s a messed-up lady.”
“I did what you do to some woman every six months–
called the whole thing off.”
“I don’t believe you.”
“It’s the truth.”
“No. It had to be something more.”
“You calling me a liar?”
“Take it any way you want. But that girl’s hurt—and thehurt came from you.”
“What’s the matter with you? You’ve been watching her
try to kill me for months and I never laid a hand on her. Now
you sit there worried about her. All of a sudden you’re
police. You’ve been wearing a halo a lot lately. You got a
white robe too?”
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“It means I’m tired of being criticized by you. I know we
don’t see eye to eye on a lot of things. I know you think I’m
lazy—not serious, you say—but if we’re friends…I don’t
meddle you, do I?”
“No. Not at all.”
Several minutes passed while Milkman played with his
beer and Guitar sipped tea. They were sitting in Mary’s
Place on a Sunday afternoon a few days after Hagar’s
latest attempt on his life.
“You’re not smoking?” asked Milkman.
“No. I quit. Feel a hell of a lot better too.” There was
another pause before Guitar continued. “You ought to stop
yourself.”
Milkman nodded. “Yeah. If I stay around you I will. I’ll stop
smoking, fucking, drinking–everything. I’ll take up a secretlife and hanging out with Empire State.”
Guitar frowned. “Now who’s meddling?”
Milkman sighed and looked straight at his friend. “I am. I
want to know why you were running around with Empire
State last Christmas.”
“He was in trouble. I helped him.”
“That’s all?”
“What else?”
“I don’t know what else. But I know there is something
else. Now, if it’s something I can’t know, okay, say so. But
something’s going on with you. And I’d like to know what it
is.”
Guitar didn’t answer.
“We’ve been friends a long time, Guitar. There’s nothing
you don’t know about me. I can tell you anything—whatever
our differences, I know I can trust you. But for some time
now it’s been a one-way street. You know what I mean? I
talk to you, but you don’t talk to me. You don’t think I can be
trusted?”
“I don’t know if you can or not.”“Try me.”
“I can’t. Other people are involved.”
“Then don’t tell me about other people; tell me about
you.”
Guitar looked at him for a long time. Maybe, he thought.
Maybe I can trust you. Maybe not, but I’ll risk it anyway
because one day…
“Okay,” he said aloud, “but you have to know that what I
tell you can’t go any further. And if it does, you’ll be
dropping a rope around my neck. Now do you still want to
know it?”
“Yeah.”
“You sure?”
“I’m sure.”
Guitar poured some more hot water over his tea. He
looked into his cup for a minute while the leaves settled
slowly to the bottom. “I suppose you know that white people
from time to time, and most folks shake their heads and
say, ’Eh, eh, eh, ain’t that a shame?’”
Milkman raised his eyebrows. He thought Guitar was
going to let him in on some deal he had going. But he wasslipping into his race bag. He was speaking slowly, as
though each word had to count, and as though he were
listening carefully to his own words. “I can’t suck my teeth or
say ‘Eh, eh, eh.’ I had to do something. And the only thing
left to do is balance it; keep things on an even keel. Any
man, any woman, or any child is good for five to seven
generations of heirs before they’re bred out. So every
death is the death of five to seven generations. You can’t
stop them from killing us, from trying to get rid of us. And
each time they succeed, they get rid of five to seven
generations. I help keep the numbers the same.
“There is a society. It’s made up of a few men who are
willing to take some risks. They don’t initiate anything; they
don’t even choose. They are as indifferent as rain. But
when a Negro child, Negro woman, or Negro man is killed
by whites and nothing is done about it by
 their
 law and
 their
courts, this society selects a similar victim at random, and
they execute him or her in a similar manner if they can. If the
Negro was hanged, they hang; if a Negro was burnt, they
burn; raped and murdered, they rape and murder. If they
can. If they can’t do it precisely in the same manner, they do
it any way they can, but they do it. They call themselves the
Seven Days. They are made up of seven men. Always
seven and only seven. If one of them dies or leaves or is no
longer effective, another is chosen. Not right away,
because that kind of choosing takes time. But they don’t
seem to be in a hurry. Their secret is time. To take the time,
to last. Not to grow; that’s dangerous because you mightbecome known. They don’t write their names in toilet stalls
or brag to women. Time and silence. Those are their
weapons, and they go on forever.
“It got started in 1920, when that private from Georgia
was killed after his balls were cut off and after that veteran
was blinded when he came home from France in World
War I. And it’s been operating ever since. I am one of them
now.”
Milkman had held himself very still all the time Guitar
spoke. Now he felt tight, shriveled, and cold.
“You? You’re going to kill people?”
“Not people. White people.”
“But why?”
“I just told you. It’s necessary; it’s got to be done. To keep
the ratio the same.”
“And if it isn’t done? If it just goes on the way it has?”
“Then the world is a zoo, and I can’t live in it.”
“Why don’t you just hunt down the ones who did the
killing? Why kill innocent people? Why not just those who
did it?”“It doesn’t matter who did it. Each and every one of them
could do it. So you just get any one of them. There are no
innocent white people, because every one of them is a
potential nigger-killer, if not an actual one. You think Hitler
surprised them? You think just because they went to war
they thought he was a freak? Hitler’s the most natural white
man in the world. He killed Jews and Gypsies because he
didn’t have us. Can you see those Klansmen shocked by
him? No, you can’t.”
“But people who lynch and slice off people’s balls—
they’re crazy, Guitar, crazy.”
“Every time somebody does a thing like that to one of us,
they say the people who did it were crazy or ignorant.
That’s like saying they were drunk. Or constipated. Why
isn’t cutting a man’s eyes out, cutting his nuts off, the kind of
thing you never get too drunk or ignorant to do? Too crazy
to do? Too constipated to do? And more to the point, how
come Negroes, the craziest, most ignorant people in
America, don’t get that crazy and that ignorant? No. White
people are unnatural. As a race they are unnatural. And it
takes a strong effort of the will to overcome an unnatural
enemy.”
“What about the nice ones? Some whites made
sacrifices for Negroes. Real sacrifices.”
“That just means there are one or two natural ones. Butthey haven’t been able to stop the killing either. They are
outraged, but that doesn’t stop it. They might even speak
out, but that doesn’t stop it either. They might even
inconvenience themselves, but the killing goes on and on.
So will we.”
“You’re missing the point. There’re not just one or two.
There’re a lot.”
“Are there? Milkman, if Kennedy got drunk and bored
and was sitting around a potbellied stove in Mississippi, he
might join a lynching party just for the hell of it. Under those
circumstances his unnaturalness would surface. But I know I
wouldn’t join one no matter how drunk I was or how bored,
and I know you wouldn’t either, nor any black man I know or
ever heard tell of. Ever. In any world, at any time, just get up
and go find somebody white to slice up. But they
 can
 do it.
And they don’t even do it for profit, which is why they do
most things. They do it for fun. Unnatural.”
“What about…” Milkman searched his memory for some
white person who had shown himself unequivocally
supportive of Negroes. “Schweitzer. Albert Schweitzer.
Would he do it?”
“In a minute. He didn’t care anything about those
Africans. They could have been rats. He was in a laboratory
testing
 himself
—proving he could work on human dogs.”“What about Eleanor Roosevelt?”
“I don’t know about the women. I can’t say what their
women would do, but I do remember that picture of those
white mothers holding up their babies so they could get a
good look at some black men burning on a tree. So I have
my suspicions about Eleanor Roosevelt. But
 none
 about
Mr. Roosevelt. You could’ve taken him and his wheelchair
and put him in a small dusty town in Alabama and given him
some tobacco, a checkerboard, some whiskey, and a rope
and he’d have done it too. What I’m saying is, under certain
conditions they would
 all
 do it. And under the same
circumstances we would not. So it doesn’t matter that some
of them
 haven’t
 done it. I listen. I read. And now I know that
they know it too. They know they are unnatural. Their writers
and artists have been saying it for years. Telling them they
are unnatural, telling them they are depraved. They call it
tragedy. In the movies they call it adventure. It’s just
depravity that they try to make glorious, natural. But it ain’t.
The disease they have is in their blood, in the structure of
their chromosomes.”
“You can prove this, I guess. Scientifically?”
“No.”
“Shouldn’t you be able to prove it before you act on
something like that?”“Did they prove anything scientifically about us before
they killed us? No. They killed us first and then tried to get
some scientific proof about why we should die.”
“Wait a minute, Guitar. If they are as bad, as unnatural, as
you say, why do you want to be like them? Don’t you want to
be better than they are?”
“I am better.”
“But now you’re doing what the worst of them do.”
“Yes, but I am reasonable.”
“Reasonable? How?”
“I am not, one, having fun; two, trying to gain power or
public attention or money or land; three, angry at anybody.”
“You’re not angry? You must be!”
“Not at all. I hate doing it. I’m afraid to do it. It’s hard to do
it when you aren’t angry or drunk or doped up or don’t have
a personal grudge against the person.”
“I can’t see how it helps. I can’t see how it helps
anybody.”
“I told you. Numbers. Balance. Ratio. And the earth, the
land.”“I’m not understanding you.”
“The earth is soggy with black people’s blood. And
before us Indian blood. Nothing can cure them, and if it
keeps on there won’t be any of us left and there won’t be
any land for those who are left. So the numbers have to
remain static.”
“But there are more of them than us.”
“Only in the West. But still the ratio can’t widen in their
favor.”
“But you should want everybody to know that the society
exists. Then maybe that would help stop it. What’s the
secrecy for?”
“To keep from getting caught.”
“Can’t you even let other Negroes know about it? I mean
to give us hope?”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“Betrayal. The possibility of betrayal.”
“Well, let
 them
 know. Let white people know. Like the
Mafia or the Klan; frighten them into behaving.”“You’re talking foolishness. How can you let one group
know and not the other? Besides, we are not like them. The
Mafia is unnatural. So is the Klan. One kills for money, the
other kills for fun. And they have huge profits and protection
at their disposal. We don’t. But it’s not about other people
knowing. We don’t even tell the victims. We just whisper to
him, ‘Your Day has come.’ The beauty of what we do is its
secrecy, its smallness. The fact that nobody needs the
unnatural satisfaction of talking about it. Telling about it. We
don’t discuss it among ourselves, the details. We just get
an assignment. If the Negro was killed on a Wednesday,
the Wednesday man takes it; if he was killed on Monday,
the Monday man takes that one. And we just notify one
another when it’s completed, not how or who. And if it ever
gets to be too much, like it was for Robert Smith, we do
that
 rather than crack and tell somebody. Like Porter. It was
getting him down. They thought somebody would have to
take over his day. He just needed a rest and he’s okay
now.”
Milkman stared at his friend and then let the spasm he
had been holding back run through him. “I can’t buy it,
Guitar.”
“I know that.”
“There’s too much wrong with it.”
“Tell me.”“Well, for one thing, you’ll get caught eventually.”
“Maybe. But if I’m caught I’ll just die earlier than I’m
supposed to—not better than I’m supposed to. And how I
die or when doesn’t interest me. What I die
 for
 does. It’s the
same as what I live for. Besides, if I’m caught they’ll accuse
me and kill me for one crime, maybe two, never for all. And
there are still six other days in the week. We’ve been
around for a long long time. And believe me, we’ll be
around for a long long time to come.”
“You can’t marry.”
“No.”
“Have children.”
“No.”
“What kind of life is that?”
“Very satisfying.”
“There’s no love in it.”
“No love? No love? Didn’t you hear me? What I’m doing
ain’t about hating white people. It’s about loving us. About
loving you. My whole life is love.”“Man, you’re confused.”
“Am I? When those concentration camp Jews hunt down
Nazis, are they hating Nazis or loving dead Jews?”
“It’s not the same thing.”
“Only because they have money and publicity.”
“No; because they turn them over to the courts. You kill
and you don’t kill the killers. You kill innocent people.”
“I told you there are no—”
“And you don’t correct a thing by—”
“We poor people, Milkman. I work at an auto plant. The
rest of us barely eke out a living. Where’s the money, the
state, the country to finance our justice? You say Jews try
their catches in a court. Do we have a court? Is there one
courthouse in one city in the country where a jury would
convict them? There are places right now where a Negro
still can’t testify against a white man. Where the judge, the
jury, the court, are legally bound to ignore anything a Negro
has to say. What that means is that a black man is a victim
of a crime only when a white man says he is. Only then. If
there was anything like or near justice or courts when a
cracker kills a Negro, there wouldn’t have to be no Seven
Days. But there ain’t; so we are. And we do it without
money, without support, without costumes, withoutnewspapers, without senators, without lobbyists, and
without illusions!”
“You sound like that red-headed Negro named X. Why
don’t you join him and call yourself Guitar X?”
“X, Bains—what difference does it make? I don’t give a
damn about names.”
“You miss his point. His point is to let white people know
you don’t accept your slave name.”
“I don’t give a shit what white people know or even think.
Besides, I do accept it. It’s part of who I am. Guitar is
 my
name. Bains is the slave master’s name. And I’m all of that.
Slave names don’t bother me; but slave status does.”
“And knocking off white folks changes your slave status?”
“Believe it.”
“Does it do anything for my slave status?”
Guitar smiled. “Well, doesn’t it?”
“Hell, no.” Milkman frowned. “Am I going to live any longer
because you all read the newspaper and then ambush
some poor old white man?”
“It’s not about you living longer. It’s about how you liveand why. It’s about whether your children can make other
children. It’s about trying to make a world where one day
white people will think before they lynch.”
“Guitar, none of that shit is going to change how I live or
how any other Negro lives. What you’re doing is crazy. And
something else: it’s a habit. If you do it enough, you can do
it to anybody. You know what I mean? A torpedo is a
torpedo, I don’t care what his reasons. You can off anybody
you don’t like. You can off me.”
“We don’t off Negroes.”
“You hear what you said?
 Negroes.
 Not Milkman. Not
‘No, I can’t touch you, Milkman,’ but ‘We don’t off Negroes.’
Shit, man, suppose
 you
 all change your parliamentary
rules?”
“The Days are the Days. It’s been that way a long time.”
Milkman thought about that. “Any other young dudes in it?
Are all the others older? You the only young one?”
“Why?”
“Cause young dudes are subject to change the rules.”
“You worried about yourself, Milkman?” Guitar looked
amused.“No. Not really.” Milkman put his cigarette out and
reached for another one. “Tell me, what’s your day?”
“Sunday. I’m the Sunday man.”
Milkman rubbed the ankle of his short leg. “I’m scared for
you, man.”
“That’s funny. I’m scared for you too.”Chapter 7
Truly landlocked people know they are. Know the
occasional Bitter Creek or Powder River that runs through
Wyoming; that the large tidy Salt Lake of Utah is all they
have of the sea and that they must content themselves with
bank, shore,
 and
 beach
 because they cannot claim a
coast. And having none, seldom dream of flight. But the
people living in the Great Lakes region are confused by
their place on the country’s edge—an edge that is border
but not coast. They seem to be able to live a long time
believing, as coastal people do, that they are at the frontier
where final exit and total escape are the only journeys left.
But those five Great Lakes which the St. Lawrence feeds
with memories of the sea are themselves landlocked, in
spite of the wandering river that connects them to the
Atlantic. Once the people of the lake region discover this,
the longing to leave becomes acute, and a break from the
area, therefore, is necessarily dream-bitten, but necessary
nonetheless. It might be an appetite for other streets, other
slants of light. Or a yearning to be surrounded by strangers.
It may even be a wish to hear the solid click of a door
closing behind their backs.
For Milkman it was the door click. He wanted to feel the
heavy white door on Not Doctor Street close behind him
and know that he might be hearing the catch settle into itsgroove for the last time.
“You’ll own it all. All of it. You’ll be free. Money is freedom,
Macon. The only real freedom there is.”
“I know, Daddy, I know. But I have to get away just the
same. I’m not leaving the country; I just want to be on my
own. Get a job on my own, live on my own. You did it at
sixteen. Guitar at seventeen. Everybody. I’m still living at
home, working for you—not because I sweated for the job,
but because I’m your son. I’m over thirty years old.”
“I need you here, Macon. If you were going to go, you
should have gone five years ago. Now I’ve come to depend
on you.” It was difficult for him to beg, but he came as close
to it as he could.
“Just a year. One year. Stake me for a year and let me
go. When I come back, I’ll work a year for nothing and pay
you back.”
“It’s not the money. It’s you being here, taking care of this.
Taking care of all I’m going to leave you. Getting to know it,
know how to handle it.”
“Let me use some of it now, when I need it. Don’t do like
Pilate, put it in a green sack and hang it from the wall so
nobody can get it. Don’t make me wait until—”
“What did you say?” As suddenly as an old dog drops ashoe when he smells raw meat, Macon Dead dropped his
pleading look and flared his nostrils with some new interest.
“I said give me a little bit—”
“No. Not that. About Pilate and a sack.”
“Yeah. Her sack. You’ve seen it, haven’t you? That green
sack she got hanging from the ceiling? She calls it her
inheritance. You can’t get from one side of the room to the
other without cracking your head on it. Don’t you remember
it?”
Macon was blinking rapidly, but he managed to calm
himself and say, “I’ve never set foot in Pilate’s house in my
life. I looked in there once, but it was dark and I didn’t see
anything hanging down from the ceiling. When’s the last
time you saw it?”
“Maybe nine or ten months ago. What about it?”
“You think it’s still there?”
“Why wouldn’t it be?”
“You say it’s green. You know for sure it’s green?”
“Yeah, green. Grass green. What is it? What’s bothering
you?”“She told you it was her inheritance, huh?” Macon was
smiling, but so craftily that Milkman could hardly recognize it
as a smile.
“No. She didn’t; Hagar did. I was walking across the
room toward the…uh…toward the other side and I’m tall
enough for it to be in my way. I bumped my head on it.
Made a hickey too. When I asked Hagar what it was she
said, ‘Pilate’s inheritance.’”
“And it made a hickey on your head?”
“Yeah. Felt like bricks. What’re you going to do, sue
her?”
“You had any lunch?”
“It’s ten-thirty, Daddy.”
“Go to Mary’s. Get us a couple of orders of barbecue.
Meet me in the park across from Mercy. We’ll eat lunch
there.”
“Daddy…”
“Go on now. Do what I say. Go on, Macon.”
They met in the little public park across the street from
Mercy Hospital. It was full of pigeons, students, drunks,
dogs, squirrels, children, trees, and secretaries. The twocolored men sat down on an iron bench a little away from
the most crowded part, but not the edge. They were very
well dressed, too well dressed to be eating pork out of a
box, but on that warm September day it seemed natural, a
perfect addition to the mellowness that pervaded the park.
Milkman was curious about his father’s agitation, but not
alarmed. So much had been going on, so many changes.
Besides, he knew whatever was making his father fidget
and look around to see if anyone was too near had to do
with something his father wanted, not something he wanted
himself. He could look at his father coolly now that he had
sat on that train and listened to his mother’s sad sad song.
Her words still danced around in his head. “What harm did I
do you on my knees?”
Deep down in that pocket where his heart hid, he felt
used. Somehow everybody was using him for something or
as something. Working out some scheme of their own on
him, making him the subject of their dreams of wealth, or
love, or martyrdom. Everything they did seemed to be
about him, yet nothing he wanted was part of it. Once
before he had had a long talk with his father, and it ended
up with his being driven further from his mother. Now he
had had a confidential talk with his mother, only to discover
that before he was born, before the first nerve end had
formed in his mother’s womb, he was the subject of great
controversy and strife. And now the one woman who
claimed to love him more than life, more than her life,actually loved him more than
 his
 life, for she had spent half
a year trying to relieve him of it. And Guitar. The one sane
and constant person he knew had flipped, had ripped open
and was spilling blood and foolishness instead of
conversation. He was a fit companion for Empire State. So
now he waited with curiosity, but without excitement or
hope, for this latest claim.
“Listen to me. Just eat your meat and listen to me. Don’t
interrupt, because I might lose my train of thought.
“A long time ago, I told you about when I was a boy on the
farm. About Pilate and me. About my father getting killed. I
never finished the story; I never told you all of it. The part I
left out was about me and Pilate. I tried to keep you away
from her and said she was a snake. Now I’m going to tell
you why.”
A red ball rolled to his feet, and Macon picked it up and
threw it back to a little girl. He made sure she was safely
back in her mother’s view before he began his story.
Six days after the first Macon Dead died, his children, a
twelve-year-old Pilate and a sixteen-year-old Macon Dead,
found themselves homeless. Bewildered and grieving, they
went to the house of the closest colored person they knew:
Circe, the midwife who had delivered them both and who
was there when their mother died and when Pilate was
named. She worked in a large house—a mansion—outsideDanville, for a family of what was then called gentlemen
farmers. The orphans called to Circe from the vegetable
garden early in the morning as soon as they saw the smoke
from the cook stove rising. Circe let them in, pressing her
hands together with relief, and saying how glad she was to
see them alive. She hadn’t known what had happened to
them after the killing. Macon explained that he had buried
his father himself, down by that part of the stream on
Lincoln’s Heaven where they used to fish together, the
place where he had caught that nine-pound trout. The grave
was shallower than it ought to be, but he’d piled rocks
there.
Circe told them to stay with her until they could all figure
out what to do, someplace for them to go. She hid them in
that house easily. There were rooms the family seldom
went into, but if they weren’t safe, she was prepared to
share her own room (which was off limits to everybody in
the house). It was small, though, so they agreed to stay in a
pair of rooms on the third floor that were used only for
storage. Circe would bring them food, water to wash in, and
she would empty their slop jar.
Macon asked if they couldn’t work there; would her
mistress take them on as kitchen help, yard help, anything?
Circe bit her tongue trying to get the words out. “You
crazy? You say you saw the men what killed him. You think
they don’t know you saw them? If they kill a growed man,what you think they do to you? Be sensible. We got to plan
and figure this thing out.”
Macon and Pilate stayed there two weeks, not a day
longer. He had been working hard on a farm since he was
five or six years old and she was born wild. They couldn’t
bear the stillness, the walls, the boredom of having nothing
to do but wait for the day’s excitement of eating and going
to the toilet. Anything was better than walking all day on
carpeting, than eating the soft bland food white people ate,
than having to sneak a look at the sky from behind ivory
curtains.
Pilate began to cry the day Circe brought her white toast
and cherry jam for breakfast. She wanted her own cherries,
from her own cherry tree, with stems and seeds; not some
too-sweet mashed mush. She thought she would die if she
couldn’t hold her mouth under Ulysses S. Grant’s teat and
squirt the warm milk into her mouth, or pull a tomato off its
vine and eat it where she stood. Craving certain specific
foods had almost devastated her. That, plus the fact that
her earlobe was sore from the operation she had
performed on herself, had her near hysteria. Before they left
the farm, she’d taken the scrap of brown paper with her
name on it from the Bible, and after a long time trying to
make up her mind between a snuffbox and a sunbonnet
with blue ribbons on it, she took the little brass box that had
belonged to her mother. Her miserable days in the mansion
were spent planning how to make an earring out of the boxwhich would house her name. She found a piece of wire,
but couldn’t get it through. Finally, after much begging and
whining, Circe got a Negro blacksmith to solder a bit of
gold wire to the box. Pilate rubbed her ear until it was
numb, burned the end of the wire, and punched it through
her earlobe. Macon fastened the wire ends into a knot, but
the lobe was swollen and running pus. At Circe’s instruction
she put cobwebs on it to draw the pus out and stop the
bleeding.
On the night of the day she cried so about the cherries,
the two of them decided that when her ear got better, they
would leave. It was too much of a hardship on Circe anyway
for them to stay there, and if her white folks found out about
them, they might let her go.
One morning Circe climbed all the way to the third floor
with a covered plate of scrapple and found two empty
rooms. They didn’t even take a blanket. Just a knife and a
tin cup.
The first day out was joyous for them. They ate
raspberries and apples; they took off their shoes and let the
dewy grass and sun-warmed dirt soothe their feet. At night
they slept in a haystack, so grateful for open air even the
field mice and the ticks were welcome bedmates.
The next day was pleasant but less exciting. They bathed
in a curve of the Susquehanna and then wandered in asoutherly direction, keeping to fields, woods, stream beds,
and little-used paths, headed, they thought, for Virginia,
where Macon believed they had people.
On the third day they woke to find a man that looked just
like their father sitting on a stump not fifty yards away. He
was not looking at them; he was just sitting there. They
would have called out to him or run toward him except he
was staring right past them with such distance in his eyes,
he frightened them. So they ran away. All day long at
various intervals they saw him: staring down into duck
ponds; framed by the Y of a sycamore tree; shading his
eyes from the sun as he peered over a rock at the wide
valley floor beneath them. Each time they saw him they
backed off and went in the opposite direction. Now the land
itself, the only one they knew and knew intimately, began to
terrify them. The sun was blazing down, the air was sweet,
but every leaf that the wind lifted, every rustle of a pheasant
hen in a clump of ryegrass, sent needles of fear through
their veins. The cardinals, the gray squirrels, the garden
snakes, the butterflies, the ground hogs and rabbits—all the
affectionate things that had peopled their lives ever since
they were born became ominous signs of a presence that
was searching for them, following them. Even the river’s
babbling sounded like the call of a liquid throat waiting, just
waiting for them. That was in the daylight. How much more
terrible was the night.
Just before dark, when the sun had left them alone, whenthey were coming out of some woods looking around for
the crest of the hill where they could see, perhaps, a farm,
an abandoned shed—anyplace where they could spend the
night—they saw a cave, and at its mouth stood their father.
This time he motioned for them to follow him. Faced with
the choice of the limitless nighttime woods and a man who
looked like their father, they chose the latter. After all, if it
was their father, he wouldn’t hurt them, would he?
Slowly they approached the mouth of the cave, following
their father’s beckoning hand and his occasional backward
glance.
They looked into the cave and saw nothing but a great
maw of darkness. Their father had disappeared. If they
stayed near the lip, they thought, it was as good a place as
any to spend the night; perhaps he was simply looking out
for them, showing them what to do and where to go. They
made themselves as comfortable as they could on a rock
formation that jutted out like a shelf from a hip-high mass of
stone. There was nothing behind them that they could see
and only the certainty of bats to disturb them. Yet it was
nothing to that other darkness—outside.
Toward morning, Macon woke from a light and fitful
sleep, with a terrific urge to relieve his bowels, the
consequence of three days’ diet of wild fruit. Without
waking his sister, he climbed off the shelf, and shy of
squatting on the crown of a hill in a new sun, he walked alittle farther back into the cave. When he was finished, the
darkness had disintegrated somewhat, and he saw, some
fifteen feet in front of him, a man stirring in his sleep. Macon
tried to button his pants and get away without waking him,
but the leaves and twigs crunching under his feet pulled the
man all the way out of his sleep. He raised his head, turned
over, and smiled. Macon saw that he was very old, very
white, and his smile was awful.
Macon stepped back, one hand outstretched behind him,
thinking all the while of how his father’s body had twitched
and danced for whole minutes in the dirt. He touched the
cave’s wall and a piece of it gave way in his hand. Closing
his fingers around it, he threw it at the grinning man’s head,
hitting him just above the eye. Blood spurted out and
knocked the smile off the pale face, but did not stop the
man from coming and coming, all the time wiping blood
from his face and smearing it on his shirt. Macon got hold
of another rock, but missed that time. The man kept
coming.
The scream that boomed down the cave tunnel and woke
the bats came just when Macon thought he had taken his
last living breath. The bleeding man turned toward the
direction of the scream and looked at the colored girl long
enough for Macon to pull out his knife and bring it down on
the old man’s back. He crashed forward, then turned his
head to look up at them. His mouth moved and he mumbled
something that sounded like “What for?” Macon stabbedhim again and again until he stopped moving his mouth,
stopped trying to talk, and stopped jumping and twitching
on the ground.
Panting with the exertion of slashing through an old
man’s rib cage, Macon ran back to get the blanket the man
had been sleeping on. He wanted the dead man to
disappear, to be covered, hidden, to be gone. When he
snatched the blanket, a large tarpaulin came with it and he
saw three boards positioned across what looked like a
shallow pit. He paused and then kicked the boards aside.
Underneath were little gray bags, their necks tied with wire,
arranged like nest eggs. Macon picked one of them up and
was amazed at its weight.
“Pilate,” he called. “Pilate.”
But she was growing roots where she stood, and staring
open-mouthed at the dead man. Macon had to pull her by
the arm over to the hole where the bags lay. After some
difficulty with the wire (he ended up having to use his teeth),
he got one open and shook the gold nuggets it held out into
the leaves and twigs that lay on the floor of the cave.
“Gold,” he whispered, and immediately, like a burglar out
on his first job, stood up to pee.
Life, safety, and luxury fanned out before him like the tail-
spread of a peacock, and as he stood there trying todistinguish each delicious color, he saw the dusty boots of
his father standing just on the other side of the shallow pit.
“It
 is
 Papa!” said Pilate. And as if in answer to her
recognition, he took a deep breath, rolled his eyes back,
and whispered, “Sing. Sing,” in a hollow voice before he
melted away again.
Pilate darted around the cave calling him, looking for
him, while Macon piled the sacks of gold into the tarpaulin.
“Let’s go, Pilate. Let’s get out of here.”
“We can’t take that.” She pointed a finger at his bundle.
“What? Not take it? You lost your mind?”
“That’s stealing. We killed a man. They’ll be after us, all
over. If we take his money, then they’ll think that’s why we
did it. We got to leave it, Macon. We can’t get caught with
no bags of money.”
“This ain’t money; it’s gold. It’ll keep us for life, Pilate. We
can get us another farm. We can–”
“Leave it, Macon! Leave it! Let them find it just where it
was!” Then she began to shout, “Papa! Papa!”
Macon slapped her and the little brass box dangled on
her ear. She cupped it in her hands for a moment and thenleaped on her brother like an antelope. They fought right
there in front of the dead man’s staring eyes. Pilate was
almost as strong as Macon, but no real match for him, and
he probably would have beaten her unconscious had she
not got his knife, not yet dry from the old man’s blood, and
held it ready for his heart.
Macon stood very still and watched her eyes. He began
calling her ugly names, but she didn’t answer. He backed
out of the cave and walked a little distance away.
All day he waited for her to come out. All day she stayed
there. When night came he just sat, at the foot of a tree,
unafraid of all the night things that had terrified him before,
eyes wide open, waiting for her to stick her woolly head out
of the cave. There was no sound from her direction and he
waited the whole night. At dawn he crept forward a foot at a
time, hoping he would catch her asleep. Just then he heard
some dogs and knew hunters were walking nearby. He ran
as fast as he could through the woods until he couldn’t hear
the dogs anymore.
Another day and a night he spent trying to work his way
back to the cave and avoid the hunters if they were still
about. Finally he got there, three days and two nights later.
Inside the cave the dead man was still looking placidly up at
him, but the tarpaulin and the gold were gone.
The secretaries went away. So did the children and thedogs. Only the pigeons, the drunks, and the trees were left
in the little park.
Milkman had eaten almost none of his barbecue. He was
watching his father’s face, shining with perspiration and the
emotions of memory.
“She took it, Macon. After all that, she took the gold.”
“How do you know? You didn’t see her take it,” said
Milkman.
“The tarpaulin was green.” Macon Dead rubbed his
hands together. “Pilate came to this city in 1930. Two years
later they call back all the gold. I figured she spent it all in
the twenty or so years since I’d seen her, since she was
living like poor trash when she got here. It was natural for
me to believe she’d got rid of it all. Now you tell me she got
a green sack full of something hard enough to give you a
hickey on your head when you bumped into it. That’s the
gold, boy. That’s it!”
He turned to his son full face and licked his lips. “Macon,
get it and you can have half of it; go wherever you want. Get
it. For both of us. Please get it, son. Get the gold.”Chapter 8
Every night now Guitar was seeing little scraps of Sunday
dresses—white and purple, powder blue, pink and white,
lace and voile, velvet and silk, cotton and satin, eyelet and
grosgrain. The scraps stayed with him all night and he
remembered Magdalene called Lena and Corinthians
bending in the wind to catch the heart-red pieces of velvet
that had floated under the gaze of Mr. Robert Smith. Only
Guitar’s scraps were different. The bits of Sunday dresses
that he saw did not fly; they hung in the air quietly, like the
whole notes in the last measure of an Easter hymn.
Four little colored girls had been blown out of a church,
and his mission was to approximate as best he could a
similar death of four little white girls some Sunday, since he
was the Sunday man. He couldn’t do it with a piece of wire,
or a switchblade. For this he needed explosives, or guns,
or hand grenades. And that would take money. He knew
that the assignments of the Days would more and more be
the killing of white people in groups, since more and more
Negroes were being killed in groups. The single, solitary
death was going rapidly out of fashion, and the Days might
as well prepare themselves for it.
So when Milkman came to him with a proposal to steal
and share a cache of gold, Guitar smiled. “Gold?” He couldhardly believe it.
“Gold.”
“Nobody got gold, Milkman.”
“Pilate does.”
“It’s against the law to have gold.”
“That’s why she got it. She can’t use it, and she can’t
report its being stolen since she wasn’t supposed to have it
in the first place.”
“How do we get rid of it—get greenbacks for it?”
“Leave that to my father. He knows bank people who
know other bank people. They’ll give him legal tender for it.”
“Legal tender.” Guitar laughed softly. “How much legal
tender will it bring?”
“That’s what we have to find out.”
“What’s the split?”
“Three ways.”
“Your papa know that?”
“Not yet. He thinks it’s two ways.”“When you gonna tell him?”
“Afterwards.”
“Will he go for it?”
“How can he
 not
 go for it?”
“When do we get it?”
“Whenever we want to.”
Guitar spread his palm. “My man.” Milkman slapped his
hand. “Legal tender. Legal tender. I love it. Sounds like a
virgin bride.” Guitar rubbed the back of his neck and lifted
his face to the sun in a gesture of expansiveness and
luxury.
“Now we have to come up with something. A way to get
it,” said Milkman.
“Be a breeze. A cool cool breeze,” Guitar continued,
smiling at the sun, his eyes closed as though to ready
himself for the gold by trying out a little bit of the sun’s.
“A breeze?” Now that Guitar was completely enthusiastic,
Milkman’s own excitement was blunted. Something
perverse made him not want to hand the whole score to his
friend on a platter. There should be some difficulty, somecomplication in this adventure. “We just walk over there and
snatch it off the wall, right? And if Pilate or Reba say
anything, we just knock them out the way. That what you
have in mind?” He summoned as much irony as he could
into his voice.
“Defeatism. That’s what you got. Defeatism.”
“Common sense is what I got.”
“Come on, old dude. Your pappy give you a good thing
and you want to fight it.”
“I’m not fighting. I just want to get out alive and breathing
so what I snatch does me some good. I don’t want to have
to give it to a brain surgeon to pull an ice pick out the back
of my head.”
“Can’t no ice pick get through the back of your head,
nigger”
“Can get through my heart.”
“What you doin with a heart anyway?”
“Pumping blood. And I’d like to keep on pumping it.”
“Okay. We got us a problem. A little bitty problem: how
can two big men get a fifty-pound sack out of a house with
three women in it—women who all together don’t weighthree hundred pounds.”
“What you have to weigh to pull a trigger?”
“What trigger? Nobody in that house got a gun.”
“You don’t know what Hagar’s got.”
“Look, Milk. She’s been trying to kill you for almost a
year. Used everything she could get her hands on and
never once did she use a gun.”
“So? Maybe she’s thinking. Wait till next month.”
“Next month she’ll be too late, won’t she?” Guitar leaned
his head over to the side and smiled at Milkman, an
engaging boyish smile. Milkman hadn’t seen him this
relaxed and cordial in a long long time. He wondered if
that’s why he had let him in on it. Obviously he could pull it
off alone, but maybe he wanted to see Guitar warm and
joking again, his face open and smiling instead of with that
grim reaper look.
They met again on Sunday on route 6 away from the
colored part of town. A road consisting of used-car lots,
Dairy Queens, and White Castle hamburger places. It was
empty of shoppers that morning—nothing but the
occasional sound of automobiles breaking the graveyard
silence of the cars in the lots, lined up like tombstones.Since that last conversation—the important one in which
Guitar explained his work, not the brief chancy talks they’d
had afterward—Milkman wished he had the nerve to ask
Guitar the question that was bothering him. “Has he?” He
could hardly phrase the question in his own mind, and
certainly could never say it aloud. Guitar had impressed
him with the seriousness and the dread of the work of the
Days, and the danger. He had said that the Days never
even talked about the details among themselves, so
Milkman was sure any inquiry from him would only make
Guitar sullen again. And cold. But the question was there.
“Has he done it? Has he really killed somebody?” Like the
old men on Tenth Street, now he bought the morning and
evening papers, and once every two weeks the black
newspaper, and read nervously, looking for reports of
murders that appeared suspicious, pointless. When he
found one, he followed the news stories until a suspect was
found. Then he had to see if there were any black people
murdered by someone other than their own.
“Did you do it yet?” He was like a teen-age girl
wondering about the virginity of her friend, the friend who
has a look, a manner newly minted—different, separate,
focused somehow. “Did you do it yet? Do you know
something both exotic and ordinary that I have not felt? Do
you now know what it’s like to risk your one and only self?
How did it feel? Were you afraid? Did it change you? And if
I do it, will it change me too?”Maybe he could ask him one day, but not this day when it
was so much like old times. Taking risks together the way
they did when Milkman was twelve and Guitar was a teen-
ager and they swaggered, haunched, leaned, straddled,
ran all over town trying to pick fights or at least scare
somebody: other boys, girls, dogs, pigeons, old women,
school principals, drunks, ice cream vendors, and the
horses of junkyard men. When they succeeded they rode
the wind and covered their mouths to aggravate their
laughter. And when they didn’t, when somebody out-
insulted them, or ignored them, or sent them running, they
wisecracked and name-called until the sweat of
embarrassment evaporated from the palms of their hands.
Now they were men, and the terror they needed to provoke
in others, if for no other reason than to feel it themselves,
was rarer but not lighter. Dominion won by fear and
secured by fear was still sweeter than any that could be got
another way. (Except for women, whom they liked to win
with charm but keep with indifference.)
It was like that again now, and Milkman didn’t want to
lose it.
There was something else too. Guitar had placed himself
willingly and eagerly in a life cause that would always
provide him with a proximity to knife-cold terror. Milkman
knew his own needs were milder, for he could thrive in the
presence of someone who inspired fear. His father, Pilate,
Guitar. He gravitated toward each one, envious of theirfearlessness now, even Hagar’s, in spite of the fact that she
was no longer a threat, but a fool who wanted not his death
so much as his attention. Guitar could still create the sense
of danger and life lived on the cutting edge. So Milkman
had brought him into this scheme only partially for his help.
Mostly because this escapade cried out for a cutting edge
to go with its larklike quality. With Guitar as his co-
conspirator, Milkman could look forward to both fun and
fear.
They sauntered on down route 6, stopping frequently to
examine the cars, gesticulating, bantering each other about
the best way to burglarize a shack that, as Guitar said,
“didn’t have a door or window with a lock.”
“But it’s got people,” Milkman insisted. “Three. All crazy.”
“Women.”
“Crazy women.”
“Women.”
“You’re forgetting, Guitar, how Pilate got the gold in the
first place. She waited in a cave with a dead man for three
days to haul it out, and that was when she was twelve. If she
did that at twelve to get it, what you think she’ll do now when
she’s almost seventy to keep it?”
“We don’t have to be rough. Cunning is all we need tobe.”
“Okay. Tell me how you gonna cunning them out of the
house.”
“Well, let’s see now.” Guitar stopped to scratch his back
on a telephone pole. He closed his eyes, in either the
ecstasy of relief or the rigors of concentration. Milkman
stared off into the sky for inspiration, and while glancing
toward the rooftops of the used-car places, he saw a white
peacock poised on the roof of a long low building that
served as headquarters for Nelson Buick. He was about to
accept the presence of the bird as one of those waking
dreams he was subject to whenever indecisiveness was
confronted with reality, when Guitar opened his eyes and
said, “Goddam! Where’d that come from?”
Milkman was relieved. “Must of come from the zoo.”
“That raggedy-ass zoo? Ain’t nothing in there but two
tired monkeys and some snakes.”
“Well, where then?”
“Beats me.”
“Look—she’s flying down.” Milkman felt again his
unrestrained joy at anything that could fly. “Some jive flying,
but look at her strut.”“He.”
“Huh?”
“He. That’s a he. The male is the only one got that tail full
of jewelry. Son of a bitch. Look at that.” The peacock
opened its tail wide. “Let’s catch it. Come on, Milk,” and
Guitar started to run toward the fence.
“What for?” asked Milkman, running behind him. “What
we gonna do if we catch him?”
“Eat him!” Guitar shouted. He swung easily over the
double pipes that bordered the lot and began to circle the
bird at a distance, holding his head a little to the side to fool
the peacock, which was strutting around a powder-blue
Buick. It closed its tail and let the tips trail in the gravel. The
two men stood still, watching.
“How come it can’t fly no better than a chicken?” Milkman
asked.
“Too much tail. All that jewelry weighs it down. Like
vanity. Can’t nobody fly with all that shit. Wanna fly, you got
to give up the shit that weighs you down.”
The peacock jumped onto the hood of the Buick and
once more spread its tail, sending the flashy Buick into
oblivion.“Faggot.” Guitar laughed softly. “White faggot.”
Milkman laughed too, and they watched a while more
before leaving the used cars and the pure white peacock.
But the bird had set them up. Instead of continuing the
argument about how they would cop, they began to
fantasize about what the gold could buy when it became
legal tender. Guitar, eschewing his recent asceticism,
allowed himself the pleasure of waking up old dreams: what
he would buy for his grandmother and her brother, Uncle
Billy, the one who had come up from Florida to help raise
them all after his father died; the marker he would buy for
his father’s grave, “pink with lilies carved on it”; then stuff for
his brother and sisters, and his sisters’ children. Milkman
fantasized too, but not for the stationary things Guitar
described. Milkman wanted boats, cars, airplanes, and the
command of a large crew. He would be whimsical,
generous, mysterious with his money. But all the time he
was laughing and going on about what he would do and
how he planned to live, he was aware of a falseness in his
voice. He wanted the money—desperately, he believed—
but other than making tracks out of the city, far away from
Not Doctor Street, and Sonny’s Shop, and Mary’s Place,
and Hagar, he could not visualize a life that much different
from the one he had. New people. New places. Command.
That was what he wanted in his life. And he couldn’t get
deep into Guitar’s talk of elegant clothes for himself and his
brother, sumptuous meals for Uncle Billy, and week-longcard games in which the stakes would be a yard and a half
and then a deuce and a quarter. He screamed and shouted
“Wooeeeee!” at Guitar’s list, but because his life was not
unpleasant and even had a certain amount of luxury in
addition to its comfort, he felt off center. He just wanted to
beat a path away from his parents’ past, which was also
their present and which was threatening to become his
present as well. He hated the acridness in his mother’s and
father’s relationship, the conviction of righteousness they
each held on to with both hands. And his efforts to ignore it,
transcend it, seemed to work only when he spent his days
looking for whatever was light-hearted and without grave
consequences. He avoided commitment and strong
feelings, and shied away from decisions. He wanted to
know as little as possible, to feel only enough to get through
the day amiably and to be interesting enough to warrant the
curiosity of other people—but not their all-consuming
devotion. Hagar had given him this last and more drama
than he could ever want again. He’d always believed his
childhood was sterile, but the knowledge Macon and Ruth
had given him wrapped his memory of it in septic sheets,
heavy with the odor of illness, misery, and unforgiving
hearts. His rebellions, minor as they were, had all been in
the company of, or shared with, Guitar. And this latest Jack
and the Beanstalk bid for freedom, even though it had been
handed to him by his father—assigned almost—stood
some chance of success.
He had half expected his friend to laugh at him, to refusewith some biting comment that would remind Milkman that
Guitar was a mystery man now, a man with blood-deep
responsibilities. But when he watched Guitar’s face as he
described what could be had almost for the asking, he
knew right away he hadn’t guessed wrong. Maybe the
professional assassin had had enough, or had changed his
mind. Had he…? “Did you…?” As he listened to him go
over each detail of meals, clothes, tombstones, he
wondered if Guitar simply could not resist the lure of
something he had never had—money.
Guitar smiled at the sun, and talked lovingly of
televisions, and brass beds, and week-long card games,
but his mind was on the wonders of TNT.
By the time they’d exhausted their imaginative spending,
it was almost noon and they were back on the edge of
Southside. They picked up where they’d left off in the
discussion of the scheme. Guitar was ready now; Milkman
was still cautious. Too cautious for Guitar.
“I don’t understand you. You come running after me with a
dynamite proposition, and for three days we talk about it,
the best news I’ve had since pussy, but when we get down
to business, you come up with some shit about how it can’t
be done. You shucking me or what?”
“What would I be shucking for? I didn’t have to tell you
about it.”“I don’t know. I don’t even know why you doing it. You
know about me—you can guess why I’m in it. But money
ain’t never been what you needed or couldn’t get.”
Milkman ignored the reference to why Guitar was “in it,”
and said as calmly as he could, “I need it to get away. I told
you, man. I got to get out of here. Be on my own.”
“On
 your
 own? With a million-dollar wallet, you call that on
your own?”
“Fuck you. What difference does it make why I want it?”
“Cause I’m not sure you do want it. At least not bad
enough to go ahead and cop.”
“I just want it right. No hassles. No…You know, burglary is
a serious crime. I don’t want to end up in—”
“What burglary? This ain’t no burglary. This is Pilate.”
“So?”
“So! They’re your people.”
“They re still people, and people scream.”
“What’s the worst? What’s the worst thing can happen?
We bust in, right? Suppose all three of them are there.
They’re women. What can they do? Whip us?”“Maybe.”
“Come on! Who? Hagar? Right up in your face she blows
it. Pilate? She loves you, boy. She wouldn’t touch you.”
“You believe that?”
“Yeah, I believe it! Look. You got qualms, tell me about
them. Because you related? Your daddy’s more related
than you are, and it’s his idea.”
“It’s not that.”
“Then what?”
“They’re crazy, Guitar. Nobody knows what they’ll do;
they
 don’t even know.”
“I know they’re crazy. Anybody live like they do, selling
fifty-cent wine and peeing in a bucket, with one million
dollars hanging over their nappy heads, has to be. You
scared of craziness? If you are,
 you’re
 crazy.”
“I don’t want to be caught, that’s all. I don’t want to do
time. I want to plan it so neither one happens. How come
that’s too much to ask? To plan.”
“It don’t look like planning. Looks like stalling.”
“It is planning. Planning how to get them out the house.How to get us in the house. How to cut that sack off the
ceiling and then get back out the house and on down the
street. And it’s hard to plan with them. They’re not regular.
They don’t have regular habits. And then there’s the
wineheads. One of them liable to drop in any old time.
They’re not clock people, Guitar. I don’t believe Pilate
knows how to tell time except by the sun.”
“They sleep at night.”
“Anybody sleep can wake up.”
“Anybody woke up can be knocked down.”
“I don’t want to knock nobody down. I want them gone
when we hit.”
“And what’s gonna make them leave?”
Milkman shook his head. “An earthquake, maybe.”
“Then let’s make an earthquake.”
“How?”
“Set the house on fire. Put a skunk in there. A bear.
Something. Anything.”
“Be serious, man.”“I’m trying, baby. I’m trying. Don’t they go nowhere?”
“All together?”
“All together.”
Milkman shrugged. “Funerals. They go to funerals. And
circuses.”
“Oh, man! We have to wait for somebody to die? Or for
Ringling Brothers to come to town?”
“I’m trying to figure it out is all. At the moment we don’t
have a chance.”
“Well, if a man don’t
 have
 a chance, then he has to
 take
a chance!”
“Be reasonable.”
“Reasonable? You can’t get no pot of gold being
reasonable. Can’t nobody get no gold being reasonable.
You have to be unreasonable. How come you don’t know
that?”
“Listen to me….”
“I just quit listening. You listen! You got a life? Live it! Live
the motherfuckin life! Live it!”Milkman’s eyes opened wide. He tried hard not to
swallow, but the clarion call in Guitar’s voice filled his mouth
with salt. The same salt that lay in the bottom of the sea and
in the sweat of a horse’s neck. A taste so powerful and
necessary that stallions galloped miles and days for it. It
was new, it was delicious, and it was his own. All the
tentativeness, doubt, and inauthenticity that plagued him
slithered away without a trace, a sound.
Now he knew what his hesitation had been all about. It
was not to give an unnatural complexity to a simple job; nor
was it to keep Guitar on hold. He had simply not believed in
it before. When his father told him that long story, it really
seemed like Jack and the Beanstalk … some fairy tale
mess. He hadn’t believed it was really there, or really gold,
or that he could really have it just for the taking. It was too
simple. But Guitar believed it, gave it a crisp concreteness,
and what’s more, made it into an act, an important, real,
and daring thing to do. He felt a self inside himself emerge,
a clean-lined definite self. A self that could join the chorus at
Railroad Tommy’s with more than laughter. He could tell
this. The only other real confrontation he’d had was hitting
his father, but that wasn’t the kind of story that stirred the
glitter up in the eyes of the old men in Tommy’s.
Milkman didn’t think through any of this clearly. He only
tasted the salt and heard the hunter’s horn in Guitar’s voice.
“Tomorrow,” he said. “Tomorrow night.”“What time?”
“One-thirty. I’ll pick you up.”
“Beautiful.”
Far down the road, a long way from Milkman and Guitar,
the peacock spread its tail.
On autumn nights, in some parts of the city, the wind from
the lake brings a sweetish smell to shore. An odor like
crystallized ginger, or sweet iced tea with a dark clove
floating in it. There is no explanation for the smell either,
since the lake, on September 19, 1963, was so full of mill
refuse and the chemical wastes of a plastics manufacturer
that the hair of the willows that stood near the shore was
thin and pale. Carp floated belly up onto the beach, and the
doctors at Mercy knew, but did not announce, that ear
infections were a certainty for those who swam in those
waters.
Yet there was this heavy spice-sweet smell that made
you think of the East and striped tents and the
 sha-sha-sha
of leg bracelets. The people who lived near the lake hadn’t
noticed the smell for a long time now because when air
conditioners came, they shut their windows and slept a light
surface sleep under the motor’s drone.
So the ginger sugar blew unnoticed through the streets,around the trees, over roofs, until, thinned out and
weakened a little, it reached Southside. There, where some
houses didn’t even have screens, let alone air conditioners,
the windows were thrown wide open to whatever the night
had to offer. And there the ginger smell was sharp, sharp
enough to distort dreams and make the sleeper believe the
things he hungered for were right at hand. To the Southside
residents who were awake on such nights, it gave all their
thoughts and activity a quality of being both intimate and far
away. The two men standing near the pines on Darling
Street—right near the brown house where wine drinkers
went—could smell the air, but they didn’t think of ginger.
Each thought it was the way freedom smelled, or justice, or
luxury, or vengeance.
Breathing the air that could have come straight from a
marketplace in Accra, they stood for what seemed to them
a very long time. One leaned against a tree, his foot
hovering off the ground. Finally one touched the elbow of
the other and they both moved toward an open window.
With no trouble at all, they entered. Although they had stood
deliberately in the dark of the pine trees, they were
unprepared for the deeper darkness that met them there in
that room. Neither had seen that kind of blackness, not
even behind their own eyelids. More unsettling than the
darkness, however, was the fact that in contrast to the heat
outside (the slumbering ginger-laden heat that had people
wiping sweat from their neck folds), it was as cold as ice in
Pilate’s house.Suddenly the moon came out and shone like a flashlight
right into the room. They both saw it at the same time. It
hung heavy, hung green like the green of Easter eggs left
too long in the dye. And like Easter, it promised everything:
the Risen Son and the heart’s lone desire. Complete
power, total freedom, and perfect justice. Guitar knelt down
before it and wove his fingers together into a footstep.
Milkman hoisted himself up, one hand on Guitar’s head,
and shifted himself until he sat on Guitar’s shoulders. Slowly
Guitar stood up. Milkman felt upward along the sack until he
found its neck. He thought the rope would have to be cut,
and was annoyed to find the sack hung by wire instead.
He hoped the knife would be enough, because they hadn’t
figured on wire and had brought neither pincers nor a wire
cutter. The sound of the grating knife filled the room. No
one, he thought, could sleep through that. At last some few
strands broke and it was only a moment before the entire
blackness was severed. They’d figured on the weight of the
sack being enough to tumble them the minute it was cut
free, and planned that at a whispered signal, Guitar would
bend his knees and sink down so Milkman’s feet would hit
the floor almost immediately. But there was no need for this
graceful footwork; the bag was much lighter than they had
anticipated, and Milkman made it down quite easily. As
soon as they both regained balance, there was a huge airy
sigh that each one believed was made by the other.
Milkman handed his knife to Guitar, who closed it andtucked it in his back pocket. There was the deep sigh again
and an even more piercing chill. Holding the sack by its
neck and its bottom, Milkman followed Guitar to the
window. Once Guitar had cleared the sill, he reached back
to help Milkman over. The moonlight was playing tricks on
him, for he thought he saw the figure of a man standing right
behind his friend. Enveloped by the heat they’d left a few
minutes earlier, they walked swiftly away from the house
and out onto the road.
At another open window on the same side of the house,
the one next to the sink where Hagar washed her hair and
where Reba put pintos to soak, a woman’s face appeared.
“What the devil they want that for?” she wondered. Then she
picked at the window sill until she had a splinter of wood
and put it in her mouth.Chapter 9
Amanuensis. That was the word she chose, and since it
was straight out of the nineteenth century, her mother
approved, relishing the blank stares she received when she
told her lady guests what position her daughter had
acquired with the State Poet Laureate. “She’s Michael-
Mary Graham’s amanuensis.” The rickety Latin word made
the work her daughter did (she, after all, wasn’t required to
work) sound intricate, demanding, and totally in keeping
with her education. And the women didn’t dare ask for
further details (they tried to remember its sound, but still
couldn’t find it in the dictionary), for they were suitably
impressed by the name of Michael-Mary Graham. It was a
lie, of course, even as the simpler word “secretary” was a
lie, but Ruth repeated it with confidence because she
believed it was true. She did not know then, and never
found out, that Corinthians was Miss Graham’s maid.
Unfit for any work other than the making of red velvet
roses, she had a hard time finding employment befitting her
degree. The three years she had spent in college, a junior
year in France, and being the granddaughter of the eminent
Dr. Foster should have culminated in something more
elegant than the two uniforms that hung on Miss Graham’s
basement door. That all these advantages didn’t was still
incredible to her. It had been assumed that she andMagdalene called Lena would marry well—but hopes for
Corinthians were especially high since she’d gone to
college. Her education had taught her how to be an
enlightened mother and wife, able to contribute to the
civilization—or in her case, the civilizing—of her
community. And if marriage was not achieved, there were
alternative roles: teacher, librarian, or…well, something
intelligent and public-spirited. When neither of these fates
tapped her on the forehead right away, she simply waited.
High toned and high yellow, she believed what her mother
was also convinced of: that she was a prize for a
professional man of color. So there were vacations and
weekends in other cities as well as visits and teas in her
own, where and when such men appeared. The first of the
black doctors to move there, in the forties when she
graduated, had a son five years her junior. The second, a
dentist, had two infant girls; the third was a very old
physician (rumored to be an alcoholic), whose two sons
were already raising families. Then there were teachers,
two lawyers, a mortician—but on the few occasions when
eligible bachelors were among them, Corinthians was not
their choice. She was pretty enough, pleasant enough, and
her father had the money they could rely on if needed, but
she lacked drive. These men wanted wives who could
manage, who were not so well accustomed to middle-class
life that they had no ambition, no hunger, no hustle in them.
They wanted their wives to like the climbing, the acquiring,
and the work it took to maintain status once it was
achieved. They wanted wives who would sacrificethemselves and appreciate the hard work and sacrifice of
their husbands. Corinthians was a little too elegant. Bryn
Mawr in 1940. France in 1939. That was a bit much. Fisk,
Howard, Talledega, Tougaloo—that was their hunting
territory. A woman who spoke French and who had traveled
on the
 Queen Mary
 might not have the proper attitude
toward future patients or clients, and if the man was a
teacher, he steered clear of a woman who had a better
education than he did. At one point post office workers
were even being considered suitable for Lena and
Corinthians, but that was long after they had reached thirty-
five, and after Ruth came to terms with the savage fact that
her daughters were not going to marry doctors. It was a
shock to them all, which they managed to withstand by not
accepting a more complete truth: that they probably were
not going to marry anybody.
Magdalene called Lena seemed resigned to her life, but
when Corinthians woke up one day to find herself a forty-
two-year-old maker of rose petals, she suffered a severe
depression which lasted until she made up her mind to get
out of the house. So her search for work—which was shock
number two—was intense. The twenty-one years that she
had been out of college worked against her for a teaching
job. She had none of the “new” courses now required by the
board of education. She considered going to the state
teachers’ school to take the required courses, even went to
the administration building to register. But the sight of those
torpedo breasts under fuzzy blue sweaters, the absolutenakedness of those young faces, drove her out of the
building and off the campus like a leaf before a hailstorm.
Which was too bad, because she had no real skills. Bryn
Mawr had done what a four-year dose of liberal education
was designed to do: unfit her for eighty percent of the useful
work of the world. First, by training her for leisure time,
enrichments, and domestic mindlessness. Second, by a
clear implication that she was too good for such work. After
graduation she returned to a work world in which colored
girls, regardless of their background, were in demand for
one and only one kind of work. And by 1963, Corinthians’
main concern was simply that her family not know that she
had been doing it for two years.
She avoided the other maids on the street, and those
whom she saw regularly on the bus assumed that she had
some higher household position than theirs since she came
to work in high-heeled shoes and only a woman who didn’t
have to be on her feet all day could stand the pressure of
heels on the long ride home. Corinthians was careful; she
carried no shopping bag of shoes, aprons, or uniforms.
Instead she had a book. A small gray book on which
Contes de Daudet
 was printed in gold lettering on its
cover. Once she was inside Miss Graham’s house she
changed into her uniform (which was a discreet blue
anyway, not white) and put on a pair of loafers before she
dropped to her knees with the pail of soapy water.
Miss Graham was delighted with Corinthians’ dress andslightly uppity manners. It gave her house the foreign air she
liked to affect, for she was the core, the very heartbeat, of
the city’s literary world. Michael-Mary Graham was very
considerate of Corinthians. When she had large dinner
parties, a Swedish cook was hired and the heavy work was
done by the old white rummy she shared with the Goodwill
Industries. Nor was she impatient with Corinthians’
undistinguished everyday cooking, for Michael-Mary ate
several small plain meals. It was also a pleasure and a
relief to have a maid who read and who seemed to be
acquainted with some of the great masters of literature. So
nice to give a maid a copy of
 Walden
 for Christmas rather
than that dreary envelope, and to be able to say so to her
friends. In the world Michael-Mary Graham inhabited, her
mild liberalism, a residue of her Bohemian youth, and her
posture of sensitive lady poet passed for anarchy.
Corinthians was naive, but she was not a complete fool.
She never let her mistress know she had ever been to
college or Europe or could recognize one word of French
that Miss Graham had not taught her
 (entrez,
 for example).
Actually, the work Corinthians did was good for her. In that
house she had what she never had in her own:
responsibility. She flourished in a way, and exchanged
arrogance occasionally for confidence. The humiliation of
wearing a uniform, even if it was blue, and deceiving
people was tempered by the genuine lift which came of
having her own money rather than receiving an allowance
like a child. And she was surprised to discover that theamount of neatly folded bills Michael-Mary handed her each
Saturday at noon was within two dollars of the amount real
secretaries took home each week.
Other than scrubbing the kitchen tile and keeping a hard
shine on the wooden floors, the work was not hard. The
poetess lived alone and shaped her time and activities
carefully in order to meet the heavy demands of artistic
responsibility. Being a poet she could, of course, do little
else. Marriage, children—all had been sacrificed to the
Great Agony and her home was a tribute to the
fastidiousness of her dedication (and the generosity of her
father’s will). Colors, furnishings, and appointments had
been selected for their inspirational value. And she was
fond of saying, in deprecating some item, “I couldn’t write a
line with
 that
 in the house.”
 That
 might be a vase, the new
toilet bowl the plumbers hauled in, a plant, or even the
Christmas wreath St. John’s third-grade class presented to
her in gratitude for the moving reading she’d given at their
holiday assembly. Every morning between ten and noon
she wrote, and every afternoon between three and four-
fifteen. Evenings were often given over to discussions and
meetings with local poets, painters, musicians, and writers
of fiction, at which they praised or condemned other artists,
scorned the marketplace and courted it. Of this group
Michael-Mary Graham was the queen, for her poetry had
been published—first in 1938, in a volume called
 Seasons
of My Soul;
 there was a second collection in 1941, called
Farther Shores.
 What was more, her poems had appearedin at least twenty small literary magazines, two “slicks,” six
college journals, and the Sunday supplements of countless
newspapers. She was also the winner, between 1938 and
1958, of nine Poet of the Year awards, culminating finally in
the much-coveted State Poet Laureateship. At the
ceremony, her most famous poem, “Watchword,” was
performed by the Choral Speech Society of St. John’s High
School. None of that, however, had mitigated the reluctance
of her publishers to bring out her complete collected works
(tentatively called
 The Farthest Shore).
 But there was no
question in her mind that they would come around.
When Miss Graham first saw Corinthians, she was not at
all impressed with her. First, because the prospective
employee came ten minutes early for the interview and
Michael-Mary, who adhered to her schedule to the minute,
was forced to answer the door in a print peignoir. Already
irritated by this lapse, she was further disenchanted by the
woman’s delicate frame. Obviously she could not put up the
screens, take down the storm windows, or endure any
sustained heavy cleaning. But when she learned the
woman’s name, Michael-Mary was so charmed by the
sound of “Corinthians Dead,” she hired her on the spot. As
she told friends later, her poetic sensibility over-whelmed
her good judgment.
They got on well together, mistress and maid, and by the
sixth month of her stay, Michael-Mary suggested that she
learn how to type. So Corinthians was almost on her way tobecoming an amanuensis after all.
Shortly after Miss Graham encouraged her to take typing
so she might be helpful with some of her mistress’s work, a
black man sat down next to Corinthians on the bus. She
took little notice of him—only that he was ill-dressed and
appeared elderly. But soon she became aware that he was
staring at her. A quick corner-of-the-eye peek to verify this
was met by his radiant smile. Corinthians turned her head
and kept it so until he got off.
The next day he was there again. Once more she made
her disdain clear. The rest of the week passed without his
watchful eyes. But on the following Monday he was back,
looking at her with an expression that stopped just short of
a leer. These occasional meetings went on for a month or
so. Corinthians thought she should be afraid of him, for
something in his manner suggested waiting—a confident,
assured waiting. Then one morning he dropped a white
envelope on the seat beside her just before he got off the
bus. She let it lie there all the way to her stop, but couldn’t
resist scooping it up as surreptitiously as possible when
she stood to pull the cord.
Standing at the stove, waiting for Michael-Mary’s milk to
skim, she opened the envelope and withdrew a greeting
card. Raised letters of the word “Friendship” hung above a
blue and yellow bouquet of flowers and were repeated
inside above a verse.Friendship is an outstretched hand,
A smile of warm devotion.
I offer both to you this day,
With all the heart’s emotion.
A white hand of no particular sex held another, smaller,
blue and yellow bouquet. There was no signature.
Corinthians threw it in the brown paper bag opened for
the day’s garbage. It stayed there all day, but it also stayed
on her mind. When evening came, she reached down
through the grapefruit rind, the tea leaves, and the salami
casing to find it, brush it clean, and transfer it to her purse.
She couldn’t explain to herself why. The man was a
complete nuisance and his flirtation an insult. But no one,
not anyone at all, had made any attempt (any serious
attempt) to flirt with her in a long time. At the very least the
card was good for conversation. She wished he had signed
it, not because she wanted to know his name, but so it
would look more authentic—otherwise somebody might
think she bought it herself.
For two weeks afterward the man was not on the bus.
When he did appear, it was hard for Corinthians not tospeak or acknowledge his presence. As they neared the
place where he usually got off, he leaned over to her and
said, “I truly hope you didn’t mind.” She looked up, gave him
a small smile, and shook her head. He said nothing more.
But on subsequent days they did exchange greetings
and finally they began to talk. In a while they were chatting
(carefully, guardedly) and she, at least, was looking forward
to his being there. By the time she knew that his name was
Henry Porter and that he had occasional yard work in that
part of town, she was glad she had never shown or
mentioned either the card or the man to anyone.
Pleasant as their conversations were, they were also
curious. Each took care not to ask the other certain
questions—for fear he or she would have to volunteer the
same information. What part of town do you live in? Do you
know Mr. So-and-so?
Eventually Mr. Porter offered to pick Corinthians up after
work. He didn’t own a car, he said, but borrowed a friend’s
sometimes. Corinthians agreed, and the result was a pair
of middle-aged lovers who behaved like teen-agers—
afraid to be caught by their parents in a love relationship
they were too young for. He took her for rides in an old gray
Oldsmobile—to the country, to drive-in movies—and they
sat over bad coffee in certain dime stores where they were
not likely to be recognized.Corinthians knew she was ashamed of him, that she
would have to add him to the other secret, the nature of her
work, that he could never set foot in her house. And she
hated him a lot for the shame she felt. Hated him
sometimes right in the middle of his obvious adoration of
her, his frequent compliments about her looks, her
manners, her voice. But those swift feelings of contempt
never lasted long enough for her to refuse those drive-in
movie sessions where she was the sole object of
someone’s hunger and satisfaction.
At some point Corinthians began to suspect that Porter’s
discretion was not only in deference to who she was (her
position and all), but also because he too didn’t want to be
discovered. Her first thought was that he was married. His
denials, accompanied by a wistful smile which she
interpreted as a sly one, only aggravated her suspicions.
Finally, to prove his bachelorhood as well as to indulge
himself in a real bed, he invited her to his room. She
declined immediately and repeatedly for several days until
he accused her of the very thing that was absolutely true:
that she was ashamed of him.
“Ashamed of you?” Her eyes and mouth went wide with
surprise (genuine surprise, because she never thought he
would guess it). “If I were ashamed I wouldn’t see you at all,
let alone
 this
 way.” Her hand pointed toward the world
outside the car they sat in: the row upon row of automobiles
in the hot drive-in movie lot.Porter traced her cheek line with his knuckle. “Well, then?
The things you tell me can’t be true and not true at the same
time.”
“I’ve never told you anything except what was true. I
thought we both knew…understood…the problem.”
“Maybe,” he said. “Let’s hear it, Corrie.” His knuckles
stroked her jaw line. “Let’s hear the problem.”
“My father. It’s only my father…the way he is.”
“How is he?”
Corinthians shrugged. “You know as well as I do. He
never wanted us to mix with…people. He’s very strict.”
“And that’s the reason you won’t come home with me?”
“I’m sorry. I have to live there. I can’t let him know about
us. Not yet.” But when? she thought. If not at forty-four, then
when? If not now, when even my pubic hair is turning gray
and when my breasts have dropped of their own accord—
then when?
Porter spoke her own question aloud. “When, then?” And
she could not answer him right away. She put her fingers to
her forehead and said, “I don’t know. I honestly don’t know.”
It was such a fake gesture to go along with her fakeIt was such a fake gesture to go along with her fake
feelings of moral and filial commitment that she knew right
away how foolish she seemed. The things they did in that
old car, the things she’d let her tongue say, as recently as
five minutes ago…and now to caress her temples and say
in Michael-Mary’s reading voice, “I don’t know,”
embarrassed her and must have disgusted Porter, for he
took his hand from her face and put it on the steering wheel.
Right at the beginning of the second feature, he started the
car and moved it slowly down the gravel aisle.
Neither spoke until the car entered downtown traffic. It
was ten-thirty. She’d told her mother she would be typing
manuscript for Miss Graham until very late. “In this heat?”
was all her mother said. Corinthians sat quietly, feeling
shame but not thinking the word, until she realized that he
was driving her to the bus stop where he always let her out
to walk home the way she normally would. In a sudden flash
she knew he was never going to see her again, and the
days rolled out before her like a dingy gray carpet in an
unfurnished, unpeopled hall-for-rent.
“Are you taking me home?” She succeeded in keeping
the anxiety out of her voice—succeeded too well, for her
words sounded arrogant and careless.
He nodded and said, “I don’t want a doll baby. I want a
woman. A grown-up woman that’s not scared of her daddy.
I guess you don’t want to be a grown-up woman, Corrie.”
She stared through the windshield. A grown-up woman?She tried to think of some. Her mother? Lena? The dean of
women at Bryn Mawr? Michael-Mary? The ladies who
visited her mother and ate cake? Somehow none of them
fit. She didn’t know any grown-up women. Every woman
she knew was a doll baby. Did he mean like the women
who rode on the bus? The other maids, who were not
hiding what they were? Or the black women who walked the
streets at night?
“You mean like those women on the bus? You can have
one of
 them,
 you know. Why don’t you drop a greeting card
in one of
 their
 laps?” His words had hit home; she had
been compared–unfavorably, she believed—with the only
people she knew for certain she was superior to. “They’d
love to have a greeting card dropped in their lap. Just love
it. But oh, I forgot. You couldn’t do that, could you, because
they wouldn’t be able to read it. They’d have to take it home
and wait till Sunday and give it to the preacher to read it to
them. Of course when they heard it they might not know
what it meant. But it wouldn’t matter—they’d see the flowers
and the curlicues all over the words and they’d be happy. It
wouldn’t matter a bit that it was the most ridiculous, most
clichéd, most commercial piece of tripe the drugstore world
has to offer. They wouldn’t know mediocrity if it punched
them right in their fat faces. They’d laugh and slap their fat
thighs and take you right on into their kitchens. Right up on
the breakfast table. But you wouldn’t give them a fifteen-
cent greeting card, would you?—no matter how silly and
stupid it was—because they’re grown-up women and youdon’t have to court
 them.
 You can just come right out and
say, ‘Hello there, come on to my room tonight.’ Right? Isn’t
that so? Isn’t that so?” She was close to screaming. “But
no. You wanted a lady. Somebody who knows how to sit
down, how to dress, how to eat the food on her plate. Well,
there is a difference between a woman and a lady, and I
know you know which one I am.”
Porter pulled the car over to the curb, and without shutting
off the motor, leaned across her and opened the door.
Corinthians got out and did her best to slam it, but the rusty
hinges of the borrowed Oldsmobile did not accommodate
her. She had to settle for the gesture.
By the time she reached number 12 Not Doctor Street,
her trembling had become uncontrollable. Suddenly the
shaking stopped and she froze at the steps. Two seconds
later she turned on her heel and ran back down the street to
where Porter had stopped the car. The moment she had
put her foot on the step leading up to the porch, she saw
her ripeness mellowing and rotting before a heap of red
velvet scraps on a round oak table. The car was still there,
its motor purring. Corinthians ran toward it faster than she
had ever run in her life, faster than she’d cut across the
grass on Honoré Island when she was five and the whole
family went there for a holiday. Faster even than the time
she flew down the stairs having seen for the first time what
the disease had done to her grandfather. She put her hand
on the door handle and found it locked. Porter was sittingpretty much the way he was when she’d tried to slam the
door. Bending down, she rapped on the window. Porter’s
profile did not move. She rapped again, louder, mindless of
who might see her under the gray beech tree just around
the corner from home. So close and yet so far, she felt as
though she were in a dream; there, but not there, within a
hair’s breadth but not reaching it.
She was First Corinthians Dead, daughter of a wealthy
property owner and the elegant Ruth Foster, granddaughter
of the magnificent and worshipped Dr. Foster, who had
been the second man in the city to have a two-horse
carriage, and a woman who had turned heads on every
deck of the
 Queen Mary
 and had Frenchmen salivating all
over Paris. Corinthians Dead, who had held herself pure all
these years (well, almost all, and almost pure), was now
banging on the car-door window of a yardman. But she
would bang forever to escape the velvet. The red velvet that
had flown all over the snow that day when she and Lena
and her mother had walked past the hospital on their way to
the department store. Her mother was pregnant—a fact that
had embarrassed Corinthians when first she learned of it.
All she could think of was how her friends would laugh when
they found out she had a pregnant mother. Her relief was
sweet when she discovered that it was too soon to show.
But by February her mother was heavy and needed to get
out of the house, to exercise a little. They’d walked slowly
through the snow, watching carefully for icy places. Then as
they passed Mercy, there was a crowd watching a man onthe roof. Corinthians had seen him before her mother did,
but when Ruth looked up she was so startled she dropped
the basket, scattering the roses everywhere. Corinthians
and Lena busied themselves picking them up, wiping the
snow from the cloth on their coats, all the while peeping at
the man in blue wings on the hospital roof. They were
laughing, Lena and she; collecting the roses, looking up at
the man, and laughing from fear, embarrassment, and
giddiness. It was all mixed together—the red velvet, the
screams, and the man crashing down on the pavement.
She had seen his body quite clearly, and to her
astonishment, there was no blood. The only red in view was
in their own hands and in the basket. Her mother’s moans
were getting louder and she seemed to be sinking into the
ground. A stretcher came at last for the dollbroken body (all
the more doll-like because there was no blood), and finally
a wheelchair for her mother, who was moving straight into
labor.
Corinthians continued to make roses, but she hated that
stupid hobby and gave Lena any excuse to avoid it. They
spoke to her of death. First the death of the man in the blue
wings. Now her own. For if Porter did not turn his head and
lean toward the door to open it for her, Corinthians believed
she would surely die. She banged her knuckles until they
ached to get the attention of the living flesh behind the
glass, and would have smashed her fist through the window
just to touch him, feel his heat, the only thing that could
protect her from a smothering death of dry roses.He did not move. In a panic, lest he shift gears and drive
away, leaving her alone in the street, Corinthians climbed
up on the fender and lay full out across the hood of the car.
She didn’t look through the windshield at him. She just lay
there, stretched across the car, her fingers struggling for a
grip on steel. She thought of nothing. Nothing except what
her body needed to do to hang on, to never let go. Even if
he drove off at one hundred miles an hour, she would hang
on. Her eyes were shut tight with the effort of clinging to the
hood, and she didn’t hear the door open and shut, nor
Porter’s footsteps as he moved around to the front of the
car. She screamed at first when he put his hand on her
shoulders and began pulling her gently into his arms. He
carried her to the passenger’s side of the car, stood her on
her feet while he opened the door and helped her ease into
the seat. In the car, he pressed her head onto his shoulder
and waited for her soft crying to wane before he left the
driver’s seat to pick up the purse she had let fall on the
sidewalk. He drove away then to number 3 Fifteenth Street,
a house owned by Macon Dead, where sixteen tenants
lived, and where there was an attic window, from which this
same Henry Porter had screamed, wept, waved a shotgun,
and urinated over the heads of the women in the yard.
It was not yet midnight and hot—hot enough to make
people angry, had it not been for a pleasant smell in the air,
like sweet ginger. Corinthians and Porter entered the hall
that opened off the front door. Except for a hem of lightunder the kitchen door, where a card game was in
progress, there was no sign of any other tenant.
Corinthians saw only the bed, an iron bed painted
hospital white. She sank down on it as soon as she got into
the room and stretched, scoured, vacuumed, and for the
first time simple. Porter undressed after she did and lay
down beside her. They were quiet for a minute, then he
turned over and parted her legs with his.
Corinthians looked down at him. “Is this for me?” she
asked.
“Yes,” he said. “Yes, this is for you.”
“Porter.”
“This is…for you. Instead of roses. And silk underwear
and bottles of perfume.”
“Porter.”
“Instead of chocolate creams in a heart-shaped box.
Instead of a big house and a great big car. Instead of long
trips…”
“Porter.”
“…in a clean white boat.”“No.”
“Instead of picnics…”
“No.”
“…and fishing…”
“No.”
“…and being old together on a porch.”
“No.”
“This is for you, girl. Oh, yes. This is for you.”
They woke at four o’clock in the morning, or rather she
did. When she opened her eyes she saw him staring at her
and those were either tears in his eyes or sweat. It was very
hot in that room in spite of the open window.
“The bathroom,” she murmured. “Where is the
bathroom?”
“Down the hall,” he said. Then, apologetically, “Can I get
you something?”
“Oh.” She pushed a few strands of matted damp hair
from her forehead. “Something to drink, please. Something
cold.”He dressed quickly, leaving off his shirt and his socks,
and left the room. Corinthians got up too and began to put
her clothes on. Since there seemed to be no mirror in the
room, she stood in front of the open window and used the
upper part of the pane, dark enough to show her reflection,
to smooth her hair. Then she noticed the walls. What she
had assumed to be wallpaper as she entered and fell on
the bed was in fact calendars. Row after row of calendars:
S. &. J. Automobile Parts, featuring a 1939 Hudson; the
Cuyahoga River Construction Company (“We build to
please—We’re pleased to build”); Lucky Hart Beauty
Products (a wavy-haired lady smiling out of a heavily
powdered face); the
 Call and Post
 newspaper. But most of
them were from the North Carolina Mutual Life Insurance
Company. They literally covered the walls, each one turned
to December. It was as though he’d kept every calendar
since 1939. Some of them were large cards displaying all
twelve months and on those she noticed circles drawn
around dates.
Porter came in while she was gazing at them. He held a
glass of iced water, the cubes jammed to the rim.
“Why do you keep calendars?” she asked.
He smiled. “Passes the time. Here. Drink your drink. It’ll
cool you.”
She took the glass and sipped a little from it, trying tokeep the ice from touching her teeth as she looked at him
over the rim. Standing there, barefoot, her hair damp with
sweat and sticking to her cheeks like paint, she felt easy. In
place of vanity she now felt a self-esteem that was quite
new. She was grateful to him, this man who rented a tiny
room from her father, who ate with a knife and did not even
own a pair of dress shoes. A perfect example of the men
her parents had kept her from (and whom she had also
kept herself from) all her life because such a man was
known to beat his woman, betray her, shame her, and leave
her. Corinthians moved close to him, tilted his chin up with
her fingers, and planted a feathery kiss on his throat. He
held her head in his hands until she closed her eyes and
tried to set the glass down on a tiny table.
“Uh uh. It’ll be light soon. Gotta get you home.”
She obeyed and finished dressing herself. They walked
as softly as possible down the stairs and past the wide
triangle of light that lay on the floor in front of the kitchen
door. The men were still at their card game, but the door
was partially open now. Porter and Corinthians moved
quickly past, just out of the light.
Still a voice called, “Who that? Mary?”
“No. Just me. Porter.”
“Porter?” The voice was incredulous. “What shift you on?”“Catch you later,” said Porter and opened the front door
before the speaker’s curiosity could propel him into the hall.
Corinthians slid as close to Porter as the floor gear of the
car allowed, her head resting on the seat back. She closed
her eyes once more and took deep breaths of the sweet air
her brother had been inhaling three hours ago.
“Hadn’t you better fix your hair?” Porter asked. He
thought she was beautiful like that, girlish, but he didn’t want
her excuse to her parents, if they were still awake, to sound
ridiculous.
She shook her head. She wouldn’t have collected her
hair into a ball at her nape now for anything in the world.
Porter parked under the same tree where Corinthians
had thrown herself across the hood of the car. Now, after a
whispered confession, she walked the four blocks, no
longer afraid to mount the porch steps.
As soon as she closed the door she heard voices and
instinctively touched her loose hair. The voices came from
beyond the dining room, from behind the closed kitchen
door. Men’s voices. Corinthians blinked. She had just come
from a house in which men sat in a lit kitchen talking in loud
excited voices, only to meet an identical scene at home.
She wondered if this part of the night, a part she was
unfamiliar with, belonged, had always belonged, to men. Ifperhaps it was a secret hour in which men rose like giants
from dragon’s teeth and, while the women slept, clustered
in their kitchens. On tiptoe she approached the door. Her
father was speaking.
“You still haven’t explained to me why you brought him
along.”
“What difference does it make now?” That was her
brother’s voice.
“He knows about it,” said her father. “That’s what
difference.”
“About what? There’s nothing to know. It was a bust.”
Milkman’s voice swelled like a blister.
“It was a mistake, not a bust. It just means it’s
somewhere else. That’s all.”
“Yeah. The mint. You want me to go to the mint?”
“No!” Macon struck the table. “It’s got to be there. It’s got
to.”
Corinthians couldn’t make sense out of what they were
talking about with so much passion, and she didn’t want to
stay there and learn, lest it distract her from the contentment
she was feeling. She left them and climbed the stairs to her
own bed.Downstairs in the kitchen, Milkman folded his arms on
the table and put his head down. “I don’t care. I don’t care
where it is.”
“It was just a mistake,” said his father. “One little mess-
up. That don’t mean we have to pull out.”
“You call being thrown in jail a little mess-up?”
“You out, ain’t you? You was only there twenty minutes.”
“Two hours.”
“Wouldn’t have been two minutes if you had called me
soon’s you got there. Sooner. Should have called me
soon’s they picked you up.”
“Police cars don’t have telephones in them.” Milkman
was weary. He lifted his head and let it rest in his hand,
directing his words into his shirt sleeve.
“They would have let you, if it had just been you. Soon as
you told them your name they would have let you go. But
you was with that Southside nigger. That’s what did it.”
“That is
 not
 what did it. It was riding around with a sack of
rocks and human bones that did it. Human bones. Which is,
if you’re a halfway intelligent cop, a hint that there must have
been a human being connected to them bones at onetime.”
“Of course at one time. But not tonight. There couldn’t
have been a human attached to the bones yesterday. It
takes time for a body to be a skeleton. They know that. And
don’t tell me it wasn’t Guitar they was suspicious of. That
yellow-eyed nigger looks like he might do anything.”
“They didn’t see his eyes when they told us to pull over.
They didn’t see nothing. They just sideswiped us, and told
us to get out. Now, what was that for? What’d they stop us
for? We wasn’t speeding. Just driving along.” Milkman
searched for cigarettes. He got angry again when he
thought about bending over the car, his legs spread, his
hands on the hood, while the policeman fingered his legs,
his back, his ass, his arms. “What business they got
stopping cars that ain’t speeding?”
“They stop anybody they want to. They saw you was
colored, that’s all. And they’re looking for the Negro that
killed that boy.”
“Who said it was a Negro?”
“Paper said it.”
“They always say that. Every time…”
“What difference does it make? If you’d been alone and
told them your name they never would have hauled you in,never would have searched the car, and never would have
opened that sack. They know me. You saw how they acted
when I got there.”
“They didn’t act any different when you got there….”
“What?”
“They acted different when you took that sucker off in the
corner and opened your wallet.”
“You better be thankful I got a wallet.”
“I am. God knows I am.”
“And that would have been the end of it, except for that
Southside nigger. Hadn’t been for him, they wouldn’t of had
to get Pilate down there.” Macon rubbed his knees. The
idea of having to depend on Pilate to get his son out of jail
humiliated him. “Raggedy bootlegging bitch.”
“She’s still a bitch?” Milkman began to chuckle.
Exhaustion and the slow release of tension made him
giddy. “You thought she stole it. All these years…all … all
these years you’ve been holding that against her.” He was
laughing out right now. “How she sneaked out of some cave
with a big bag of gold that must have weighed a hundred
pounds over her shoulder, all over the country for fifty years
and didn’t spend none of it, just hung it from the ceiling like
a fuckin sack of onions.” Milkman put his head back and letthe laughter fill the kitchen. Macon was silent. “Fifty years…
You been thinking about that gold for fifty years! Oh, shit.
This is some crazy shit….” Tears of laughter were running
from his eyes. “Crazy. All of you. Just straight-out, laid-back
crazy. I should of known. The whole thing was crazy;
everything about it was crazy—the whole idea.”
“What’s crazier? Her hauling a sack of gold around all
this time, or hauling a dead man’s bones around? Huh?
Which one?” Macon asked.
“I don’t know. I really don’t know.”
“If she do one, she could do the other. She’s the one they
should have kept. When you all told them the bones
belonged to her, they should have locked her up soon’s she
walked in the door.”
Milkman wiped the tears on his sleeve. “Lock her up for
what? After that story she told?” He started laughing again.
“She came in there like Louise Beaver and Butterfly
McQueen all rolled up in one. ‘Yassuh, boss. Yassuh,
boss….”
“She didn’t say that.”
“Almost. She even changed her voice.”
“I told you she was a snake. Drop her skin in a split
second.”“She didn’t even look the same. She looked short. Short
and pitiful.”
“That’s cause she wanted it back. She wanted them to let
her have the bones back.”
“Her poor husband’s bones, that she didn’t have no
money to bury. Pilate got a husband somewhere?”
“Does the Pope?”
“Well, she got ’em back. They gave ’em to her.”
“She knew what she was doing, all right.”
“Yeah, she knew. But how did she know so fast? I mean
she came in there…you know…prepared… you know …
prepared. She had it all together when she got there. Cop
must have told her everything when he picked her up and
brought her to the station.”
“Uh uh. They don’t do that.”
“Then how did she know?”
“Who knows what Pilate knows?”
Milkman shook his head. “Only The Shadow knows.” He
was still amused, but earlier, when he and Guitar had sat
handcuffed on a wooden bench, his neck skin had crawledhandcuffed on a wooden bench, his neck skin had crawled
with fear.
“White man’s bones,” Macon said. He stood up and
yawned. The dark of the sky was softened now. “Nigger
bitch roaming around with a white man’s bones.” He
yawned again. “I’ll never understand that woman. I’m
seventy-two years old and I’m going to die not
understanding one thing about her.” Macon walked toward
the kitchen door and opened it. Then he turned around and
said to Milkman, “But you know what that means, don’t you?
If she took the white man’s bones and left the gold, then the
gold must still be there.” He shut the door before his son
could protest.
Well, it would rot there, thought Milkman. If anybody even
mentions the word “gold,” I’m going to have to take his teeth
out. He sat on there in the kitchen, wishing for more coffee,
but too tired to get up and fix it. In a minute his mother
would be downstairs; she had got up when he and Macon
had come in, but Macon sent her back upstairs. Milkman
fished for another cigarette and watched dawn eclipse the
electric light over the sink. It was a cheery sun, which
suggested another hot day. But the stronger it got, the more
desolate he became. Alone, without Macon, he let the
events of the night come back to him—he remembered
little things, details, and yet he wasn’t sure these details
had really happened. Perhaps he made them up. Pilate
had
 been shorter. As she stood there in the receiving room
of the jail, she didn’t even come up to the sergeant’sshoulder—and the sergeant’s head barely reached
Milkman’s own chin. But Pilate was as tall as he was. When
she whined to the policeman, verifying Milkman’s and
Guitar’s lie that they had ripped off the sack as a joke on an
old lady, she had to look up at him. And her hands were
shaking as she described how she didn’t know the sack
was gone until the officer woke her up; that she couldn’t
imagine why anybody would want to run off with her
husband’s bones; that her husband had been lynched in
Mississippi fifteen years ago, and that they wouldn’t let her
cut him down, and that she left town then and that when she
went back the body had dropped off the rope of its own
accord, so she collected it and tried to bury it, but the
“funeral peoples” wanted fifty dollars for a coffin, and the
carpenter wanted twelve-fifty for a pine box and she just
didn’t have no twelve dollars and fifty cents so she just
carried what was left of Mr. Solomon (she always called
him Mr. Solomon cause he was such a dignified colored
man) and put it in a sack and kept it with her. “Bible say
what so e’er the Lord hath brought together, let no man put
asunder—Matthew Twenty-one: Two. We was bony fide
and legal wed, suh,” she pleaded. Even her eyes, those big
sleepy old eyes, were small as she went on: “So I thought I
just as well keep him near me and when I die they can put
him in the same hole as me. We’ll raise up to Judgment
Day together. Hand in hand.”
Milkman was astonished. He thought Pilate’s only
acquaintance with the Bible was the getting of names out ofit, but she quoted it, apparently, verse and chapter.
Furthermore, she had looked at Milkman and Guitar and
Macon like she didn’t know who exactly they were. In fact,
when asked if she knew them, she pointedly said, “Not this
man, here,” looking at her brother, “but I do believe I’ve
noticed this fella around the neighborhood.” Here she
motioned toward Guitar, who sat there like marble with the
eyes of a dead man. Later, as Macon drove them all home
—Pilate sitting in front, Guitar and himself in the back—
Guitar never said a word. His anger was like heat
shimmering out of his skin, making the hot air blowing in
through the open window seem refreshing by comparison.
And again there was a change. Pilate was tall again. The
top of her head, wrapped in a silk rag, almost touched the
roof of the car, as did theirs. And her own voice was back.
She spoke, but to Macon only, and nobody else spoke at
all. In a conversational tone, like somebody picking up a
story that had been interrupted in the telling, she told her
brother something quite different from what she told the
policemen.
“I spent that whole day and night in there, and when I
looked out the next morning you was gone. I was scared I
would run into you, but I didn’t see hide nor hair of you. It
was three years or more ‘fore I went back. The winter it
was. Snow was everywhere and I couldn’t hardly find my
way. I looked up Circe first, then went looking for the cave. It
was a hard trek, I can tell you, and I was in frail condition.Snow piled up every which way. But you should of known
better than to think I’d go back there for them little old bags.
I wasn’t stuttin ’em when I first laid eyes on ’em, I sure
wasn’t thinking about them three years later. I went cause
Papa told me to. He kept coming to see me, off and on. Tell
me things to do. First he just told me to sing, to keep on
singing. ‘Sing,’ he’d whisper. ‘Sing, sing.’ Then right after
Reba was born he came and told me outright: ‘You just
can’t fly on off and leave a body,’ he tole me. A human life is
precious. You shouldn’t fly off and leave it. So I knew right
away what he meant cause he was right there when we did
it. He meant that if you take a life, then you own it. You
responsible for it. You can’t get rid of nobody by killing
them. They still there, and they yours now. So I had to go
back for it. And I did find the cave. And there he was. Some
wolves or something must have drug it cause it was right in
the mouth of the cave, laying up, sitting up almost, on that
very rock we slept on. I put him in my sack, piece by piece.
Some cloth was still on him, but his bones was clean and
dry. I’ve had it every since. Papa told me to, and he was
right, you know. You can’t take a life and walk off and leave
it. Life is life. Precious. And the dead you kill is yours. They
stay with you anyway, in your mind. So it’s a better thing, a
more better thing to have the bones right there with you
wherever you go. That way, it frees up your mind.”
Fucks up your mind, thought Milkman, fucks it up for
good. He pulled himself up from the table. He had to get
some sleep before he went looking for Guitar.Staggering up the stairs, he remembered Pilate’s back
as she got out of the Buick—not bent at all under the weight
of the sack. And he remembered how Guitar glared at her
as she walked away from the car. When Macon dropped
him off, he neither answered nor turned his head at
Milkman’s “See y’ later.”
Milkman woke at noon. Somebody had come into his
room and placed a small fan on the floor near the foot of his
bed. He listened to the whirring for a long time before he
got up and went into the bathroom to fill the tub. He lay there
in lukewarm water, still sweating, too hot and tired to soap
himself. Every now and then he flicked water on his face,
letting it wet his two-day-old beard. He wondered if he
could shave without slicing his chin open. The tub was
uncomfortable, too short for him to stretch out, though he
remembered when he could almost swim in it. Now he
looked down at his legs. The left one looked just as long as
the other. His eyes traveled up his body. The touch of the
policeman’s hand was still there—a touch that made his
flesh jump like the tremor of a horse’s flank when flies light
on it. And something more. Something like shame stuck to
his skin. Shame at being spread-eagled, fingered, and
handcuffed. Shame at having stolen a skeleton, like a kid
on a Halloween trick-or-treat prank rather than a grown man
making a hit. Shame at needing both his father and his aunt
to get him off. Then more shame at seeing his father—with
an accommodating “we all understand how it is” smile—buckle before the policemen. But nothing was like the
shame he felt as he watched and listened to Pilate. Not just
her Aunt Jemima act, but the fact that she was both adept
at it and willing to do it—for him. For the one who had just
left her house carrying what he believed was her
inheritance. It didn’t matter that he also believed she had
“stolen” it…. From whom? From a dead man? From his
father, who was also stealing it? Then and now? He had
stolen it too, and what’s more, he had been prepared—at
least he told himself he had been prepared—to knock her
down if she had come into the room while he was in the act
of stealing it. To knock down an old black lady who had
cooked him his first perfect egg, who had shown him the
sky, the blue of it, which was like her mother’s ribbons, so
that from then on when he looked at it, it had no distance,
no remoteness, but was intimate, familiar, like a room that
he lived in, a place where he belonged. She had told him
stories, sung him songs, fed him bananas and corn bread
and, on the first cold day of the year, hot nut soup. And if his
mother was right, this old black lady—in her late sixties, but
with the skin and agility of a teen-aged girl—had brought
him into the world when only a miracle could have. It was
this woman, whom he would have knocked senseless, who
shuffled into the police station and did a little number for the
cops—opening herself up wide for their amusement, their
pity, their scorn, their mockery, their disbelief, their
meanness, their whimsy, their annoyance, their power, their
anger, their boredom—whatever would be useful to her and
to himself.Milkman sloshed his legs in the water. He thought again
of how Guitar had looked at Pilate—the jeweled hatred in
his eyes. He had no right to that look. Suddenly, Milkman
knew the answer to the question he had never been able to
ask Guitar. Guitar could kill, would kill, and probably had
killed. The Seven Days was the consequence of this ability,
but not its origin. No. He had no cause to look at her like
that, Milkman thought, and heaving himself upright in the
tub, he soaped himself hurriedly.
The September heat blasted him as soon as he got
outside, and wiped out the pleasant effects of his bath.
Macon had taken the Buick—age forced him to walk less—
so Milkman went on foot to Guitar’s house. As he rounded
the corner, he noticed a familiar-looking gray Oldsmobile, a
jagged crack in the rear window, parked in front of the
house. Several men were inside and two were standing
outside: Guitar and Railroad Tommy. Milkman slowed his
steps. Tommy was talking, while Guitar nodded his head.
Then the two men shook hands—a handshake Milkman
had never seen before: first Tommy held Guitar’s hand in
both his own, then Guitar held Tommy’s hand in his two.
Tommy got in the car and Guitar dashed around the house
to the side stairs that led to his room. The Oldsmobile—
Milkman figured it was a 1953 or 1954 model—made a
tight U-turn and headed toward him. When it passed by, all
the occupants looked straight ahead. Porter was driving,
with Empire State in the middle and Railroad Tommy onthe far side, and in the back seat was Hospital Tommy and
a man named Nero. Milkman didn’t know the other man.
That must be
 them,
 he thought. His heart beat wildly. Six
men, one of them Porter, and Guitar. Those are the Days.
And that car. That was the car that let Corinthians off near
the house sometimes. Milkman had first assumed his sister
had an occasional lift home from her job. Later, since she
never mentioned it, and also because she seemed quieter
and rounder lately, he decided she was seeing some man
on the sly. He thought it funny, sweet and a little sad. But
now he knew that whoever she was seeing belonged to that
car and belonged to the Seven Days. Foolish woman, he
thought. Of all the people to pick. She was so silly. So silly.
Jesus!
He wasn’t up to Guitar now. He would see him later.
People behaved much better, were more polite, more
understanding when Milkman was drunk. The alcohol didn’t
change him at all, but it had a tremendous impact on
whomever he saw while he was under its influence. They
looked better, never spoke above a whisper, and when they
touched him, even to throw him out of the house party
because he had peed in the kitchen sink, or when they
picked his pockets as he dozed on a bench at the bus
station, they were gentle, loving.
He stayed that way, swaying from light buzz to stoned, fortwo days and a night, and would have extended it to at least
another day but for a sobering conversation with
Magdalene called Lena, to whom he had not said more
than four consecutive sentences since he was in the ninth
grade.
She was waiting for him at the top of the stairs when he
came home early one morning. Wrapped in a rayon robe
and without her glasses, she looked unreal yet kind, like the
man who had picked his pocket a short while ago.
“Come here. I want to show you something. Can you
come in here for a minute?” She was whispering.
“Can’t it wait?” He was kind too; and he was proud of the
civility in his voice, considering how tired he was.
“No,” she said. “No. You have to see it now. Today. Just
look at it.”
“Lena, I’m really beat out…” he began in sweet
reasonableness.
“It won’t take more’n a minute. It’s important.”
He sighed and followed her down the hall into her
bedroom. She walked to the window and pointed. “Look
down there.”
In what seemed to him like elegant if slow motion,Milkman went to the window, parted the curtain, and
followed her pointing finger with his eyes. All he saw was
the lawn at the side of the house. Not a thing was moving
there, but in the light of early day he thought he might have
missed it.
“What?”
“That little maple. Right there.” She pointed to a tiny
maple tree about four feet high. “The leaves should be
turning red now. September is almost over. But they’re not;
they’re just shriveling and falling down green.”
He turned to her and smiled. “You said it was important.”
He was not angry, not even irritated, and he enjoyed his
equanimity.
“It is important. Very important.” Her voice was soft; she
kept on staring at the tree.
“Then tell me. I’ve got to go to work in a few minutes.”
“I know. But you can spare me a minute, can’t you?”
“Not to stare at a dead bush, I can’t.”
“It’s not dead yet. But it will be soon. The leaves aren’t
turning this year.”
“Lena, you been in the sherry?”“Don’t make fun of me,” she said, and there was a hint of
steel in her voice.
“But you have, haven’t you?”
“You’re not paying any attention to me.”
“I am. I’m standing here listening to you tell me the news
of the day—that a bush is dying.”
“You don’t remember it, do you?”
“Remember it?”
“You peed on it.”
“I what?”
“You peed on it.”
“Lena, maybe we can discuss this later….”
“And on me.”
“Uh…Lena, I have done some things in my life. Some
things I don’t feel too good about. But I swear to God I never
peed on you.”
“It was summer. The year Daddy had that Packard. We
went for a ride and you had to go to the bathroom.Remember?”
Milkman shook his head. “No. I don’t remember that.”
“I took you. We were in the country and there was no
place else to go. So they made me take you. Mama wanted
to, but Daddy wouldn’t let her. And he wouldn’t go himself.
Corinthians turned up her nose and refused outright, so
they made me go. I had on heels too. I was a girl too, but
they made me go. You and I had to slide down a little slope
off the shoulder of the road. It was pretty back in there. I
unbuttoned your pants and turned away so you could be
private. Some purple violets were growing all over the
grass, and wild jonquil. I picked them and took some twigs
from a tree. When I got home I stuck them in the ground
right down there.” She nodded toward the window. “Just
made a hole and stuck them in. I always liked flowers, you
know. I was the one who started making artificial roses. Not
Mama. Not Corinthians. Me. I loved to do it. It kept me .
quiet. That’s why they make those people in the asylum
weave baskets and make rag rugs. It keeps them quiet. If
they didn’t have the baskets they might find out what’s really
wrong and…do something. Something terrible. After you
peed on me, I wanted to kill you. I even tried to once or
twice. In little ways: leaving soap in your tub, things like that.
But you never slipped and broke your neck, or fell down the
stairs or anything.” She laughed a little. “But then I saw
something. The flowers I’d stuck in the ground, the ones you
peed on–well, they died, of course, but not the twig. It lived.It’s that maple. So I wasn’t mad about it anymore—the pee,
I mean—because the tree was growing. But it’s dying now,
Macon.”
Milkman rubbed the corner of his eye with his ring finger.
He was so sleepy. “Yeah, well, that was a helluva piss,
wouldn’t you say? You want me to give it another shot?”
Magdalene called Lena drew one hand out of the pocket
of her robe and smashed it across his mouth. Milkman
stiffened and made an incomplete gesture toward her. She
ignored it and said, “As surely as my name is Magdalene,
you are the line I will step across. I thought because that
tree was alive that it was all right. But forgot that there are
all kinds of ways to pee on people.”
“You listen here.” Milkman was sober now and he spoke
as steadily as he could. “I’m going to make some
allowance for your sherry—up to a point. But you keep your
hands off me. What is all this about peeing on people?”
“You’ve been doing it to us all your life.”
“You’re crazy. When have I ever messed over anybody in
this house? When did you ever see me telling anybody
what to do or giving orders? I don’t carry no stick; I live and
let live, you know that.”
“I know you told Daddy about Corinthians, that she was
seeing a man. Secretly. And—”“I
 had
 to. I’d love for her to find somebody, but I
 know
 that
man. I—I’ve been around him. And I don’t think he…”
Milkman stopped, unable to explain. About the Days, about
what he suspected.
“Oh?” Her voice was thick with sarcasm. “You have
somebody else in mind for her?”
“No.”
“No? But he’s Southside, and not good enough for her?
It’s good enough for you, but not for her, right?”
“Lena…”
“What do you know about somebody not being good
enough for somebody else? And since when did you care
whether Corinthians stood up or fell down? You’ve been
laughing at us all your life. Corinthians. Mama. Me. Using
us, ordering us, and judging us: how we cook your food;
how we keep your house. But now, all of a sudden, you
have Corinthians’ welfare at heart and break her up from a
man you don’t approve of. Who are you to approve or
disapprove anybody or anything? I was breathing air in the
world thirteen years before your lungs were even formed.
Corinthians, twelve. You don’t know a single thing about
either one of us—we made roses; that’s all you knew—but
now you know what’s best for the very woman who wiped
the dribble from your chin because you were too young tothe dribble from your chin because you were too young to
know how to spit. Our girlhood was spent like a found nickel
on you. When you slept, we were quiet; when you were
hungry, we cooked; when you wanted to play, we
entertained you; and when you got grown enough to know
the difference between a woman and a two-toned Ford,
everything in this house stopped for you. You have yet to
wash your own underwear, spread a bed, wipe the ring
from your tub, or move a fleck of your dirt from one place to
another. And to this day, you have never asked one of us if
we were tired, or sad, or wanted a cup of coffee. You’ve
never picked up anything heavier than your own feet, or
solved a problem harder than fourth-grade arithmetic.
Where do you get the
 right
 to decide our lives?”
“Lena, cool it. I don’t want to hear it.”
“I’ll tell you where. From that hog’s gut that hangs down
between your legs. Well, let me tell you something, baby
brother: you will need more than that. I don’t know where
you will get it or who will give it to you, but mark my words,
you will need more than that. He has forbidden her to leave
the house, made her quit her job, evicted the man,
garnisheed his wages, and it is all because of you. You are
exactly like him. Exactly. I didn’t go to college because of
him. Because I was afraid of what he might do to Mama.
You think because you hit him once that we all believe you
were protecting her. Taking her side. It’s a lie. You were
taking over, letting us know you had the right to tell her and
all of us what to do.”She stopped suddenly and Milkman could hear her
breathing. When she started up again, her voice had
changed; the steel was gone and in its place was a drifting,
breezy music. “When we were little girls, before you were
born, he took us to the icehouse once. Drove us there in his
Hudson. We were all dressed up, and we stood there in
front of those sweating black men, sucking ice out of our
handkerchiefs, leaning forward a little so as not to drip
water on our dresses. There were other children there.
Barefoot, naked to the waist, dirty. But we stood apart, near
the car, in white stockings, ribbons, and gloves. And when
he talked to the men, he kept glancing at us, us and the car.
The car and us. You see, he took us there so they could see
us, envy us, envy him. Then one of the little boys came over
to us and put his hand on Corinthians’ hair. She offered him
her piece of ice and before we knew it,
 he
 was running
toward us. He knocked the ice out of her hand into the dirt
and shoved us both into the car. First he displayed us, then
he splayed us. All our lives were like that: he would parade
us like virgins through Babylon, then humiliate us like
whores in Babylon. Now he has knocked the ice out of
Corinthians’ hand again. And you are to blame.”
Magdalene called Lena was crying. “You are to blame. You
are a sad, pitiful, stupid, selfish, hateful man. I hope your
little hog’s gut stands you in good stead, and that you take
good care of it, because you don’t have anything else. But I
want to give you notice.” She pulled her glasses out of her
pocket and put them on. Her eyes doubled in size behindthe lenses and were very pale and cold. “I don’t make roses
anymore, and you have pissed your last in this house.”
Milkman said nothing.
“Now,” she whispered, “get out of my room.”
Milkman turned and walked across the room. It was good
advice, he thought. Why not take it? He closed the door.Part IIChapter 10
When Hansel and Gretel stood in the forest and saw the
house in the clearing before them, the little hairs at the nape
of their necks must have shivered. Their knees must have
felt so weak that blinding hunger alone could have
propelled them forward. No one was there to warn or hold
them; their parents, chastened and grieving, were far away.
So they ran as fast as they could to the house where a
woman older than death lived, and they ignored the
shivering nape hair and the softness in their knees. A
grown man can also be energized by hunger, and any
weakness in his knees or irregularity in his heartbeat will
disappear if he thinks his hunger is about to be assuaged.
Especially if the object of his craving is not gingerbread or
chewy gumdrops, but gold.
Milkman ducked under the boughs of black walnut trees
and walked straight toward the big crumbling house. He
knew that an old woman had lived in it once, but he saw no
signs of life there now. He was oblivious to the universe of
wood life that did live there in layers of ivy grown so thick he
could have sunk his arm in it up to the elbow. Life that
crawled, life that slunk and crept and never closed its eyes.
Life that burrowed and scurried, and life so still it was
indistinguishable from the ivy stems on which it lay. Birth,
life, and death—each took place on the hidden side of aleaf. From where he stood, the house looked as if it had
been eaten by a galloping disease, the sores of which were
dark and fluid.
One mile behind him were macadam and the reassuring
sounds of an automobile or two—one of which was
Reverend Cooper’s car, driven by his thirteen-year-old
nephew.
Noon, Milkman had told him. Come back at noon. He
could just as easily have said twenty minutes, and now that
he was alone, assaulted by what city people regard as
raucous silence, he wished he had said five minutes. But
even if the boy hadn’t had chores to do, it would be foolish
to be driven fifteen miles outside Danville on “business”
and stay a hot minute.
He should never have made up that elaborate story to
disguise his search for the cave; somebody might ask him
about it. Besides, lies should be very simple, like the truth.
Excessive detail was simply excess. But he was so tired
after the long bus ride from Pittsburgh, coming right after
the luxury of the flight, he was afraid he wouldn’t be
convincing.
The airplane ride exhilarated him, encouraged illusion
and a feeling of invulnerability. High above the clouds,
heavy yet light, caught in the stillness of speed (“Cruise,”
the pilot said), sitting in intricate metal become glisteningbird, it was not possible to believe he had ever made a
mistake, or could. Only one small thought troubled him—
that Guitar was not there too. He would have loved it—the
view, the food, the stewardesses. But Milkman wanted to
do this by himself, with no input from anybody. This one
time he wanted to go solo. In the air, away from real life, he
felt free, but on the ground, when he talked to Guitar just
before he left, the wings of all those other people’s
nightmares flapped in his face and constrained him. Lena’s
anger, Corinthians’ loose and uncombed hair, matching her
slack lips, Ruth’s stepped-up surveillance, his father’s
bottomless greed, Hagar’s hollow eyes—he did not know
whether he deserved any of that, but he knew he was fed up
and he knew he had to leave quickly. He told Guitar of his
decision before he told his father.
“Daddy thinks the stuff is still in the cave.”
“Could be.” Guitar sipped his tea.
“Anyway, it’s worth checking out. At least we’ll know once
and for all.”
“I couldn’t agree more.”
“So I’m going after it.”
“By yourself?”
Milkman sighed. “Yeah. Yeah. By myself. I need to get outof here. I mean I really have to go away somewhere.”
Guitar put his cup down and folded his hands in front of
his mouth. “Wouldn’t it be easier with the two of us?
Suppose you have trouble?”
“It might be easier, but it might look more suspicious with
two men instead of one roaming around the woods. If I find
it, I’ll haul it back and we’ll split it up just like we agreed. If I
don’t, well, I’ll be back anyway.”
“When you leaving?”
“Tomorrow morning.”
“What’s your father say about you going alone?”
“I haven’t told him yet. You’re the only one knows so far.”
Milkman stood up and went to the window that looked out
on Guitar’s little porch. “Shit.”
Guitar was watching him carefully. “What’s the matter?”
he asked. “Why you so low? You don’t act like a man on his
way to the end of the rainbow.”
Milkman turned around and sat on the sill. “I hope it is a
rainbow, and nobody has run off with the pot, cause I need
it.”
“Everybody needs it.”“Not as bad as me.”
Guitar smiled. “Look like you really got the itch now. More
than before.”
“Yeah, well, everything’s worse than before, or maybe it’s
the same as before. I don’t know. I just know that I want to
live my own life. I don’t want to be my old man’s office boy
no more. And as long as I’m in this place I will be. Unless I
have my own money. I have to get out of that house and I
don’t want to owe anybody when I go. My family’s driving
me crazy. Daddy wants me to be like him and hate my
mother. My mother wants me to think like her and hate my
father. Corinthians won’t speak to me; Lena wants me out.
And Hagar wants me chained to her bed or dead.
Everybody wants something from me, you know what I
mean? Something they think they can’t get anywhere else.
Something they think I got. I don’t know what it is—I mean
what it is they really want.”
Guitar stretched his legs. “They want your life, man.”
“My life?”
“What else?”
“No. Hagar wants my life. My family…they want—”
“I don’t mean that way. I don’t mean they want your deadlife; they want your living life.”
“You’re losing me,” said Milkman.
“Look. It’s the condition our condition is in. Everybody
wants the life of a black man. Everybody. White men want
us dead or quiet—which is the same thing as dead. White
women, same thing. They want us, you know, ‘universal,’
human, no ‘race consciousness.’ Tame, except in bed.
They like a little racial loincloth in the bed. But outside the
bed they want us to be individuals. You tell them, ‘But they
lynched my papa,’ and they say, ‘Yeah, but you’re better
than the lynchers are, so forget it.’ And black women, they
want your whole self. Love, they call it, and understanding.
‘Why don’t you
 understand
 me?’ What they mean is, Don’t
love anything on earth except me. They say, ‘Be
responsible,’ but what they mean is, Don’t go anywhere
where I ain’t. You try to climb Mount Everest, they’ll tie up
your ropes. Tell them you want to go to the bottom of the
sea—just for a look—they’ll hide your oxygen tank. Or you
don’t even have to go that far. Buy a horn and say you want
to play. Oh, they love the music, but only after you pull eight
at the post office. Even if you make it, even if you stubborn
and mean and you get to the top of Mount Everest, or you
do play and you good, real good—that still ain’t enough.
You blow your lungs out on the horn and they want what
breath you got left to hear about how you love them. They
want your full attention. Take a risk and they say you not for
real. That you don’t love them. They won’t even let you riskyour
 own
 life, man, your own life—unless it’s over them. You
can’t even die unless it’s about them. What good is a man’s
life if he can’t even choose what to die for?”
“Nobody can choose what to die for.”
“Yes you can, and if you can’t, you can damn well try to.”
“You sound bitter. If that’s what you feel, why are you
playing your numbers game? Keeping the racial ratio the
same and all? Every time I ask you what you doing it for,
you talk about love. Loving Negroes. Now you say—”
“It
 is
 about love. What else but love? Can’t I love what I
criticize?”
“Yeah, but except for skin color, I can’t tell the difference
between what the white women want from us and what the
colored women want. You say they all want our life, our
living life. So if a colored woman is raped and killed, why
do the Days rape and kill a white woman? Why worry about
the colored woman at all?”
Guitar cocked his head and looked sideways at
Milkman. His nostrils flared a little. “Because she’s
 mine
.”
“Yeah. Sure.” Milkman didn’t try to keep disbelief out of
his voice. “So everybody wants to kill us, except black men,
right?”“Right.”
“Then why did my father—who is a very black man—try to
kill me before I was even born?”
“Maybe he thought you were a little girl; I don’t know. But I
don’t have to tell you that your father is a very strange
Negro. He’ll reap the benefits of what we sow, and there’s
nothing we can do about that. He behaves like a white man,
thinks like a white man. As a matter of fact, I’m glad you
brought him up. Maybe you can tell me how, after losing
everything his own father worked for to some crackers,
after
 seeing
 his father shot down by them, how can he keep
his knees bent? Why does he love them so? And Pilate.
She’s worse. She saw it too and, first, goes back to get a
cracker’s bones for some kind of crazy self-punishment,
and second, leaves the cracker’s gold right where it was!
Now, is that voluntary slavery or not? She slipped into those
Jemima shoes cause they fit.”
“Look, Guitar. First of all, my father doesn’t care whether
a white man lives or swallows lye. He just wants what they
have. And Pilate is a little nuts, but she wanted us out of
there. If she hadn’t been smart, both our asses would be
cooling in the joint right now.”
“My ass. Not yours. She wanted you out, not me.”
“Come on. That ain’t even fair.”“No. Fair is one more thing I’ve given up.”
“But to Pilate? What for? She knew what we did and still
she bailed us out. Went down for us, clowned and crawled
for us. You saw her face. You ever see anything like it in
your life?”
“Once. Just once,” said Guitar. And he remembered
anew how his mother smiled when the white man handed
her the four ten-dollar bills. More than gratitude was
showing in her eyes. More than that. Not love, but a
willingness to love. Her husband was sliced in half and
boxed backward. He’d heard the mill men tell how the two
halves, not even fitted together, were placed cut side down,
skin side up, in the coffin. Facing each other. Each eye
looking deep into its mate. Each nostril inhaling the breath
the other nostril had expelled. The right cheek facing the
left. The right elbow crossed over the left elbow. And he had
worried then, as a child, that when his father was wakened
on Judgment Day his first sight would not be glory or the
magnificent head of God—or even the rainbow. It would be
his own other eye.
Even so, his mother had smiled and shown that
willingness to love the man who was responsible for
dividing his father up throughout eternity. It wasn’t the
divinity from the foreman’s wife that made him sick. That
came later. It was the fact that instead of life insurance, the
sawmill owner gave his mother forty dollars “to tide you andthem kids over,” and she took it happily and bought each of
them a big peppermint stick on the very day of the funeral.
Guitar’s two sisters and baby brother sucked away at the
bone-white and blood-red stick, but Guitar couldn’t. He held
it in his hand until it stuck there. All day he held it. At the
graveside, at the funeral supper, all the sleepless night. The
others made fun of what they believed was his miserliness,
but he could not eat it or throw it away, until finally, in the
outhouse, he let it fall into the earth’s stinking hole.
“Once,” he said. “Just once.” And felt the nausea all over
again. “The crunch is here,” he said. “The big crunch. Don’t
let them Kennedys fool you. And I’ll tell you the truth: I hope
your daddy’s right about what’s in that cave. And I sure
hope you don’t have no second thoughts about getting it
back here.”
“What’s that supposed to mean?”
“It means I’m nervous. Real nervous. I need the bread.”
“If you’re in a hurt, I can let you have—”
“Not
 me. Us.
 We have work to do, man. And just
recently”—Guitar squinted his eyes at Milkman—“just
recently one of us was put out in the streets, by somebody I
don’t have to name. And his wages were garnisheed cause
this somebody said two months rent owing. This somebody
needs two months rent on a twelve-by-twelve hole in thewall like a fish needs side pockets. Now we have to take
care of this man, get him a place to stay, pay the so-called
back rent, and—”
“That was my fault. Let me tell you what happened….”
“No. Don’t tell me nothing. You ain’t the landlord and you
didn’t put him out. You may have handed him the gun, but
you didn’t pull the trigger. I’m not blaming you.”
“Why not? You talk about my father, my father’s sister,
and you’ll talk about my sister too if I let you. Why you trust
me?”
“Baby, I hope I never have to ask myself that question.”
It ended all right, that gloomy conversation. There was no
real anger and nothing irrevocable was said. When
Milkman left, Guitar opened his palm as usual and Milkman
slapped it. Maybe it was fatigue, but the touching of palms
seemed a little weak.
At the Pittsburgh airport he discovered that Danville was
240 miles northeast, and not accessible by any public
transportation other than a Greyhound bus. Reluctantly,
unwilling to give up the elegance he had felt on the flight, he
taxied from the airport to the bus station and settled himself
for two idle hours before the Greyhound left. By the time he
boarded, the inactivity, the picture magazines he’d read,
the strolls in the streets near the station, had exhaustedhim. He fell asleep fifteen minutes outside Pittsburgh. When
he woke it was late in the afternoon, with an hour more to
go before he reached Danville. His father had raved about
the beauty of this part of the country, but Milkman saw it as
merely green, deep into its Indian summer but cooler than
his own city, although it was farther south. The mountains,
he thought, must make for the difference in temperature.
For a few minutes he tried to enjoy the scenery running past
his window, then the city man’s boredom with nature’s
repetition overtook him. Some places had lots of trees,
some did not; some fields were green, some were not, and
the hills in the distance were like the hills in every distance.
Then he watched signs—the names of towns that lay
twenty-two miles ahead, seventeen miles to the east, five
miles to the northeast. And the names of junctions,
counties, crossings, bridges, stations, tunnels, mountains,
rivers, creeks, landings, parks, and lookout points.
Everybody had to do his act, he thought, for surely anybody
who was interested in Dudberry Point already knew where
it was.
He had two bottles of Cutty Sark in his suitcase, along
with two shirts and some underwear. The large suitcase, he
thought, would have its real load on the return trip. Now he
wished he had not checked it under the bus, for he wanted
a drink right then. According to his watch, the gold
Longines his mother had given him, it would be another
twenty minutes before a stop. He lay back on the headrest
and tried to fall asleep. His eyes were creasing from thesustained viewing of uneventful countryside.
In Danville he was astonished to learn that the bus depot
was a diner on route 11 where the counterman sold bus
tickets, hamburgers, coffee, cheese and peanut butter
crackers, cigarettes, candy and a cold-cut plate. No
lockers, no baggage room, no taxi, and now he realized no
men’s room either.
Suddenly he felt ridiculous. What was he supposed to
do? Put his suitcase down and ask the man: Where is the
cave near the farm where my father lived fifty-eight years
ago? He knew nobody, had no names except the first name
of an old lady who was now dead. And rather than call any
more attention to himself in this tiny farming town than his
beige three-piece suit, his button-down light-blue shirt and
black string tie, and his beautiful Florsheim shoes had
already brought, he asked the counterman if he could check
his bag there. The man gazed at the suitcase and seemed
to be turning the request over in his mind.
“I’ll pay,” said Milkman.
“Leave ’er here. Back a the pop crates,” the man said.
“When you wanna pick ’er up?”
“This evening,” he said.
“Fine. She’ll be right here.”Milkman left the diner/bus station with a small satchel of
shaving things and walked out into the streets of Danville,
Pennsylvania. He’d seen places like this in Michigan, of
course, but he never had to do anything in them other than
buy gas. The three stores on the street were closing up for
the night. It was five-fifteen and about a dozen people, all
told, were walking on the sidewalks. One of them was a
Negro. A tall man, elderly, with a brown peaked cap and an
old-fashioned collar. Milkman followed him for a while, then
caught up to him and said, “Say, I wonder if you could help
me.” He smiled as he spoke.
The man turned around but did not answer. Milkman
wondered if he had offended him in some way. Finally the
man nodded and said, “Do what I can.” He had a slight
country lilt, like that of the white man at the counter.
“I’m looking for…Circe, a lady named Circe. Well, not
her, but her house. Do you know where she used to live?
I’m from out of town. I just got off the bus. I have some
business to take care of here, an insurance policy, and I
need to check on some property out there.”
The man was listening and apparently not going to
interrupt him, so Milkman ended his sentence lamely with:
“Can you help me?”
“Reverend Cooper would know,” said the man.“Where can I find him?” Milkman felt something missing
from the conversation.
“Stone Lane. Follow this here street till you come to the
post office. Go on around the post office and that’ll be
Windsor. The next street is Stone Lane. He lives in there.”
“Will there be a church there?” Milkman assumed a
preacher lived next door to his church.
“No. No. Church ain’t got no parsonage. Reverend
Cooper lives in Stone Lane. Yella house, I believe.”
“Thanks,” said Milkman. “Thanks a lot.”
“Mighty welcome,” said the man. “Good evenin’.” And he
walked away.
Milkman considered whether to go back for his suitcase,
abandoned the idea, and followed the directions given him.
An American flag identified the post office, a frame
structure next to a drugstore that served also as the
Western Union office. He turned left at the corner, but
noticed there were no street signs anywhere. How could he
find Windsor or Stone Lane if there were no signs? He
walked through a residential street, another and another,
and he was just about to go back to the drugstore and look
under “A.M.E.” or “A.M.E. Zion” in the telephone directory
when he saw a yellow-and-white house. Maybe this is it, he
thought. He climbed the steps, determined to mind hismanners. A thief should be polite and win goodwill.
“Good evening. Is Reverend Cooper here?”
A woman was standing in the doorway. “Yes, he’s here.
Would you like to come in? I’ll call him.”
“Thank you.” Milkman entered a tiny hall and waited.
A short chubby man appeared, fingering his glasses.
“Yes, sir? You wanted to see me?” His eyes ran rapidly
over Milkman’s clothes, but his voice betrayed no
excessive curiosity.
“Yes. Uh … how are you?”
“Fine. Fine. And you?”
“Pretty good.” Milkman felt as awkward as he sounded.
He had never had to try to make a pleasant impression on
a stranger before, never needed anything from a stranger
before, and did not remember ever asking anybody in the
world how they were. I might as well say it all, he thought. “I
could use your help, sir. My name is Macon Dead. My
father is from around—”
“Dead? Macon Dead, you say?”
“Yes.” Milkman smiled apologetically for the name. “My
father—”“Well, I’ll be.” Reverend Cooper took off his glasses.
“Well, I’ll be! Esther!” He threw his voice over his shoulder
without taking his eyes off his guest. “Esther, come here!”
Then to Milkman: “I know your people!”
Milkman smiled and let his shoulders slump a little. It was
a good feeling to come into a strange town and find a
stranger who knew your people. All his life he’d heard the
tremor in the word: “I live here, but my
 people
…” or: “She
acts like she ain’t got no
 people,”
 or: “Do any of your
people live there?” But he hadn’t known what it meant: links.
He remembered Freddie sitting in Sonny’s Shop just
before Christmas, saying, “None of my people would take
me in.” Milkman beamed at Reverend Cooper and his wife.
“You do?”
“Sit on down here, boy. You the son of the Macon Dead I
knew. Oh, well, now, I don’t mean to say I knew him all that
well. Your daddy was four or five years older than me, and
they didn’t get to town much, but everybody round here
remembers the old man. Old Macon Dead, your granddad.
My daddy and him was good friends. A blacksmith, my
daddy was. I’m the only one got the call. Well well well.”
Reverend Cooper grinned and massaged his knees. “Oh,
Lord, I’m forgetting myself. You must be hungry. Esther, get
him something to fill himself up on.”
“Oh, no. No, thank you, sir. Maybe a little something to
drink. I mean if you do drink, that is.”“Sure. Sure. Nothing citified, I’m sorry to say, but—
Esther!” She was on her way to the kitchen. “Bring some
glasses and get that whiskey out the cupboard. This here’s
Macon Dead’s boy and he’s tired and needs a drink. Tell
me, how’d you find me? Don’t tell me your daddy
remembered me?”
“He probably does, but I met a man in the street and he
told me how to find you.”
“You asked him for me?” Reverend Cooper wanted to
get all the facts straight. Already he was framing the story
for his friends: how the man came to his house first, how he
asked for him….
Esther returned with a Coca-Cola tray, two glasses, and
a large mayonnaise jar of what looked like water. Reverend
Cooper poured it warm and neat into the two glasses. No
ice, no water—just pure rye whiskey that almost tore
Milkman’s throat when he swallowed it.
“No. I didn’t ask for you by name. I asked him if he knew
where a woman named Circe used to live.”
“Circe? Yes. Lord, old Circe!”
“He told me to talk to you.”
Reverend Cooper smiled and poured more whiskey.“Everybody round here knows me and I know everybody.”
“Well, I know my father stayed with her awhile, after
they…when they…after his father died.”
“They had a fine place. Mighty fine. Some white folks own
it now. Course that’s what they wanted. That’s why they shot
him. Upset a lot of people here, a whole lot of people.
Scared ’em too. But didn’t your daddy have a sister name
of Pilate?”
“Yes, sir. Pilate.”
“Still living, is she?”
“Oh, yes. Very much living.”
“Issat so? Pretty girl, real pretty. My daddy was the one
made the earring for her. That’s how we knew they was
alive. After Old Macon Dead was killed, nobody knew
whether the children was dead too or what. Then a few
weeks passed and Circe came to my daddy’s shop. Right
across from where the post office is now—that’s where my
daddy’s blacksmith shop was. She came in there with this
little metal box with a piece of paper bag folded up in it.
Pilate’s name was written on it. Circe didn’t tell Daddy
anything, but that he was to make a earring out of it. She
stole a brooch from the folks she worked for. My daddy
took the gold pin off it and soldered it to the box. So we
knew they was alive and Circe was taking care of ’em.They’d be all right with Circe. She worked for the Butlers—
rich white folks, you know—but she was a good midwife in
those days. Delivered everybody. Me included.”
Maybe it was the whiskey, which always made other
people gracious when he drank it, but Milkman felt a glow
listening to a story come from this man that he’d heard
many times before but only half listened to. Or maybe it was
being there in the place where it happened that made it
seem so real. Hearing Pilate talk about caves and woods
and earrings on Darling Street, or his father talk about
cooking wild turkey over the automobile noise of Not
Doctor Street, seemed exotic, something from another
world and age, and maybe not even true. Here in the
parsonage, sitting in a cane-bottomed chair near an upright
piano and drinking homemade whiskey poured from a
mayonnaise jar, it was real. Without knowing it, he had
walked right by the place where Pilate’s earring had been
fashioned, the earring that had fascinated him when he was
little, the fixing of which informed the colored people here
that the children of the murdered man were alive. And this
was the living room of the son of the man who made the
earring.
“Did anybody ever catch the men who did it—who killed
him?”
Reverend Cooper raised his eyebrows. “Catch?” he
asked, his face full of wonder. Then he smiled again.“Didn’t have to catch ’em. They never went nowhere.”
“I mean did they have a trial; were they arrested?”
“Arrested for what? Killing a nigger? Where did you say
you was from?”
“You mean nobody did anything? Didn’t even try to find
out who did it?”
“Everybody knew who did it. Same people Circe worked
for—the Butlers.”
“And nobody did anything?” Milkman wondered at his
own anger. He hadn’t felt angry when he first heard about it.
Why now?
“Wasn’t nothing to do. White folks didn’t care, colored
folks didn’t dare. Wasn’t no police like now. Now we got a
county sheriff handles things. Not then. Then the circuit
judge came through just once or twice a year. Besides, the
people what did it owned half the county. Macon’s land was
in their way. Folks just was thankful the children escaped.”
“You said Circe worked for the people who killed him.
Did she know that?”
“Course she did.”
“And she let them stay there?”“Not out in the open. She hid them.”
“Still, they were in the same house, right?”
“Yep. Best place, I’d say. If they came to town
somebody’d see’em. Nobody would think of looking there.”
“Did Daddy—did my father know that?”
“I don’t know what he knew, if Circe ever told him. I never
saw him after the murder. None of us did.”
“Where are they? The Butlers. They still live here?”
“Dead now. Every one of ’em. The last one, the girl
Elizabeth, died a couple years back. Barren as a rock and
just as old. Things work out, son. The ways of God are
mysterious, but if you live it out, just live it out, you see that it
always works out. Nothing they stole or killed for did ’em a
bit a good. Not one bit.”
“I don’t care whether it did them good. The fact is they did
somebody else harm.”
Reverend Cooper shrugged. “White folks different up
your way?”
“No, I guess not…. Sometimes, though, you can do
something.”“What?” The preacher looked genuinely interested.
Milkman couldn’t answer except in Guitar’s words, so he
said nothing.
“See this here?” The reverend turned around and
showed Milkman a knot the size of a walnut that grew
behind his ear. “Some of us went to Philly to try and march
in an Armistice Day parade. This was after the First World
War. We were invited and had a permit, but the people, the
white people, didn’t like us being there. They started a
fracas. You know, throwing rocks and calling us names.
They didn’t care nothing ‘bout the uniform. Anyway, some
police on horseback came—to quiet them down, we
thought. They ran
 us
 down. Right under their horses. This
here’s what a hoof can do. Ain’t that something?”
“Jesus God.”
“You wouldn’t be here to even things up, would you?” The
preacher leaned over his stomach.
“No. I’m passing through, that’s all. Just thought I’d look
around. I wanted to see the farm….”
“Cause any evening up left to do, Circe took care of.”
“What’d she do?”
“Hah! What didn’t she do?”“Sorry I didn’t come out here long time ago. I would have
liked to meet her. She must have been a hundred years old
when she died.”
“Older. Was a hundred when I was a boy.”
“Is the farm nearby?” Milkman appeared mildly
interested.
“Not too far.”
“I sort of wanted to see where it was since I’m out this
way. Daddy talked so much about it.”
“It’s right back of the Butler place, about fifteen miles out.
I can take you there. My old piece of car’s in the shop, but it
was supposed to be ready yesterday. I’ll check on it.”
Milkman waited four days for the car to be ready. Four
days at Reverend Cooper’s house as his guest, and the
purpose of long visits from every old man in the town who
remembered his father or his grandfather, and some who’d
only heard. They all repeated various aspects of the story,
all talked about how beautiful Lincoln’s Heaven was. Sitting
in the kitchen, they looked at Milkman with such rheumy
eyes, and spoke about his grandfather with such awe and
affection, Milkman began to miss him too. His own father’s
words came back to him: “I worked right alongside my
father. Right alongside him.” Milkman thought then that hisfather was boasting of his manliness as a child. Now he
knew he had been saying something else. That he loved his
father; had an intimate relationship with him; that his father
loved him, trusted him, and found him worthy of working
“right alongside” him. “Something went wild in me,” he’d
said, “when I saw him on the ground.”
His was the genuine feeling that Milkman had faked
when Reverend Cooper described the hopelessness of
“doing anything.” These men remembered both Macon
Deads as extraordinary men. Pilate they remembered as a
pretty woods-wild girl “that couldn’t nobody put shoes on.”
Only one of them remembered his grandmother. “Good-
lookin, but looked like a white woman. Indian, maybe. Black
hair and slanted-up eyes. Died in childbirth, you know.” The
more the old men talked—the more he heard about the only
farm in the county that grew peaches, real peaches like
they had in Georgia, the feasts they had when hunting was
over, the pork kills in the winter and the work, the
backbreaking work of a going farm—the more he missed
something in his life. They talked about digging a well,
fashioning traps, felling trees, warming orchards with fire
when spring weather was bad, breaking young horses,
training dogs. And in it all was his own father, the second
Macon Dead, their contemporary, who was strong as an ox,
could ride bareback and barefoot, who, they agreed,
outran, outplowed, outshot, outpicked, outrode them all. He
could not recognize that stern, greedy, unloving man in the
boy they talked about, but he loved the boy they describedand loved that boy’s father, with his hip-roofed barn, his
peach trees, and Sunday break-of-dawn fishing parties in a
fish pond that was two acres wide.
They talked on and on, using Milkman as the ignition that
gunned their memories. The good times, the hard times,
things that changed, things that stayed the same—and
head and shoulders above all of it was the tall, magnificent
Macon Dead, whose death, it seemed to him, was the
beginning of their own dying even though they were young
boys at the time. Macon Dead was the farmer they wanted
to be, the clever irrigator, the peachtree grower, the hog
slaughterer, the wild-turkey roaster, the man who could plow
forty in no time flat and sang like an angel while he did it.
He had come out of nowhere, as ignorant as a hammer and
broke as a convict, with nothing but free papers, a Bible,
and a pretty black-haired wife, and in one year he’d leased
ten acres, the next ten more. Sixteen years later he had one
of the best farms in Montour County. A farm that colored
their lives like a paintbrush and spoke to them like a
sermon. “You see?” the farm said to them. “See? See what
you can do? Never mind you can’t tell one letter from
another, never mind you born a slave, never mind you lose
your name, never mind your daddy dead, never mind
nothing. Here, this here, is what a man can do if he puts his
mind to it and his back in it. Stop sniveling,” it said. “Stop
picking around the edges of the world. Take advantage,
and if you can’t take advantage, take disadvantage. We
live here. On this planet, in this nation, in this county righthere. Nowhere else! We got a home in this rock, don’t you
see! Nobody starving in my home; nobody crying in my
home, and if I got a home you got one too! Grab it. Grab
this land! Take it, hold it, my brothers, make it, my brothers,
shake it, squeeze it, turn it, twist it, beat it, kick it, kiss it,
whip it, stomp it, dig it, plow it, seed it, reap it, rent it, buy it,
sell it, own it, build it, multiply it, and pass it on—can you
hear me? Pass it on!”
But they shot the top of his head off and ate his fine
Georgia peaches. And even as boys these men began to
die and were dying still. Looking at Milkman in those
nighttime talks, they yearned for something. Some word
from him that would rekindle the dream and stop the death
they were dying. That’s why Milkman began to talk about
his father, the boy they knew, the son of the fabulous Macon
Dead. He bragged a little and they came alive. How many
houses his father owned (they grinned); the new car every
two years (they laughed); and when he told them how his
father tried to buy the Erie Lackawanna (it sounded better
that way), they hooted with joy. That’s him! That’s Old
Macon Dead’s boy, all right! They wanted to know
everything and Milkman found himself rattling off assets like
an accountant, describing deals, total rents income, bank
loans, and this new thing his father was looking into—the
stock market.
Suddenly, in the midst of his telling, Milkman wanted the
gold. He wanted to get up right then and there and go get it.Run to where it was and snatch every grain of it from under
the noses of the Butlers, who were dumb enough to believe
that if they killed one man his whole line died. He glittered in
the light of their adoration and grew fierce with pride.
“Who’d your daddy marry?”
“The daughter of the richest Negro doctor in town.”
“That’s him! That’s Macon Dead!”
“Send you all to college?”
“Sent my sisters. I work right alongside him in our office.”
“Hah! Keep you home to get that money! Macon Dead
gonna always make him some money!”
“What kinda car he drive?”
“Buick. Two-twenty-five.”
“Great God, a deuce and a quarter! What year?”
“This year!”
“That’s him! That’s Macon Dead! He gonna buy the Erie
Lackawanna’ If he want it, he’ll get it! Bless my soul. Bet he
worry them white folks to death. Can’t nobody keep him
down! Not no Macon Dead! Not in this world! And not in thenext! Haw! Goddam! The Erie Lacka
wan
na!”
After all the waiting, Reverend Cooper couldn’t go. His
preaching income was supplemented by freightyard work
and he was called for an early shift. His nephew, called
Nephew since he was their only one, was assigned to drive
Milkman out to the farm—as close as they could get.
Nephew was thirteen and barely able to see over the
steering wheel.
“Does he have a license?” Milkman asked Mrs. Cooper.
“Not yet,” she said, and when she saw his consternation
she explained that farm kids drove early—they had to.
Milkman and Nephew started out right after breakfast. It
took them the better part of an hour because the roads
were curving two-lanes and they spent twenty minutes
behind a light truck they couldn’t pull around. Nephew
spoke very little. He seemed interested only in Milkman’s
clothes, which he took every opportunity to examine.
Milkman decided to give him one of his shirts, and asked
him to stop by the bus station to pick up the suitcase he’d
left there.
Finally Nephew slowed down on a stretch of road that
showed no houses at all. He stopped.
“What’s the matter? You want me to drive?”“No, sir. This is it.”
“What’s it? Where?”
“Back in there.” He pointed to some bushes. “The road to
the Butler place is in there and the farm’s back behind it.
You got to walk it. Car won’t make it.”
Nothing was truer; as it turned out, Milkman’s feet could
hardly make it over the stony road covered with second
growth. He had asked Nephew to wait, thinking he would
survey the area quickly and come back later on his own.
But the boy had chores, he said, and would be back
whenever Milkman wanted him to be there.
“An hour,” said Milkman.
“Take me an hour just to get back to town,” said Nephew.
“Reverend Cooper said you were to take me. Not leave
me stranded.”
“My mama whip me, I don’t do my chores.”
Milkman was annoyed, but because he didn’t want the
boy to think he was nervous about being left out there
alone, he agreed to having him come back at—he glanced
at his heavy, overdesigned watch—at noon. It was nine
o’clock then.His hat had been knocked off by the first branches of the
old walnut trees, so he held it in his hand. His cuffless pants
were darkened by the mile-long walk over moist leaves.
The quiet fairly roared in his ears. He was uncomfortable
and a little anxious, but the gold loomed large in his mind,
as did the faces of the men he’d drunk with last night, and
he stepped firmly onto the gravel and leaves of the
driveway which circled the biggest house he’d ever seen.
This is where they stayed, he thought, where Pilate cried
when given cherry jam. He stood still a moment. It must
have been beautiful, must have seemed like a palace to
them, but neither had ever spoken of it in any terms but how
imprisoned they felt, how difficult it was to see the sky from
their room, how repelled they were by the carpets, the
draperies. Without knowing who killed their father, they
instinctively hated the murderers’ house. And it did look like
a murderer’s house. Dark, ruined, evil. Never, not since he
knelt by his window sill wishing he could fly, had he felt so
lonely. He saw the eyes of a child peer at him over the sill of
the one second-story window the ivy had not covered. He
smiled. Must be myself I’m seeing—thinking about how I
used to watch the sky out the window. Or maybe it’s the
light trying to get through the trees. Four graceful columns
supported the portico, and the huge double door featured a
heavy, brass knocker. He lifted it and let it fall; the sound
was soaked up like a single raindrop in cotton. Nothing
stirred. He looked back down the path and saw the green
maw out of which he had come, a greenish-black tunnel, theend of which was nowhere in sight.
The farm, they said, was right in back of the Butler place,
but knowing how different their concept of distance was, he
thought he’d better get moving. If he found what he was
looking for he would have to come back at night—with
equipment, of course, but also with some familiarity with the
area. On impulse he reached out his hand and tried to turn
the doorknob. It didn’t budge. Half turning to leave—literally
as an afterthought—he pushed the door and it swung open
with a sigh. He leaned in. The smell prevented him from
seeing anything more than the absence of light did. A hairy
animal smell, ripe, rife, suffocating. He coughed and looked
for somewhere to spit, for the odor was in his mouth,
coating his teeth and tongue. He pulled a handkerchief from
his back pocket, held it over his nose, backed away from
the open door, and had just begun to spill the little breakfast
he’d eaten when the odor disappeared and, quite suddenly,
in its place was a sweet spicy perfume. Like ginger root—
pleasant, clean, seductive. Surprised and charmed by it, he
retraced his steps and went inside. After a second or two
he was able to see the hand-laid and hand-finished
wooden floor in a huge hall, and at its farther end a wide
staircase spiraling up into the dark. His eyes traveled up
the stairs.
He had had dreams as a child, dreams every child had,
of the witch who chased him down dark alleys, between
lawn trees, and finally into rooms from which he could notescape. Witches in black dresses and red underskirts;
witches with pink eyes and green lips, tiny witches, long
rangy witches, frowning witches, smiling witches,
screaming witches and laughing witches, witches that flew,
witches that ran, and some that merely glided on the
ground. So when he saw the woman at the top of the stairs
there was no way for him to resist climbing up toward her
outstretched hands, her fingers spread wide for him, her
mouth gaping open for him, her eyes devouring him. In a
dream you climb the stairs. She grabbed him, grabbed his
shoulders and pulled him right up against her and tightened
her arms around him. Her head came to his chest and the
feel of that hair under his chin, the dry bony hands like steel
springs rubbing his back, her floppy mouth babbling into his
vest, made him dizzy, but he knew that always, always at
the very instant of the pounce or the gummy embrace he
would wake with a scream and an erection. Now he had
only the erection.
Milkman closed his eyes, helpless to pull away before the
completion of the dream. What made him surface from it
was a humming sound around his knees. He looked down
and there, surrounding him, was a pack of golden-eyed
dogs, each of which had the intelligent child’s eyes he had
seen from the window. Abruptly the woman let him go and
he looked down at her too. Beside the calm, sane,
appraising eyes of the dogs, her eyes looked crazy. Beside
their combed, brushed gun-metal hair, hers was wild and
filthy.She spoke to the dogs. “Go on away. Helmut, go on.
Horst, move.” She waved her hands and the dogs obeyed.
“Come, come,” she said to Milkman. “In here.” She took
his hand in both of hers, and he followed her—his arm
outstretched, his hand in hers—like a small boy being
dragged reluctantly to bed. Together they weaved among
the bodies of the dogs that floated around his legs. She led
him into a room, made him sit on a gray velvet sofa, and
dismissed all the dogs but two that lay at her feet.
“Remember the Weimaraners?” she asked, settling
herself, pulling her chair close to him.
She was old. So old she was colorless. So old only her
mouth and eyes were distinguishable features in her face.
Nose, chin, cheekbones, forehead, neck all had
surrendered their identity to the pleats and crochetwork of
skin committed to constant change.
Milkman struggled for a clear thought, so hard to come
by in a dream: Perhaps this woman is Circe. But Circe is
dead. This woman is alive. That was as far as he got,
because although the woman was talking to him, she might
in any case still be dead—as a matter of fact, she
 had
 to
be dead. Not because of the wrinkles, and the face so old it
could not be alive, but because out of the toothless mouth
came the strong, mellifluent voice of a twenty-year-old girl.“I knew one day you would come back. Well, that’s not
entirely true. Some days I doubted it and some days I didn’t
think about it at all. But you see, I was right. You did come.”
It was awful listening to that voice come from that face.
Maybe something was happening to his ears. He wanted to
hear the sound of his own voice, so he decided to take a
chance on logic.
“Excuse me. I’m his son. I’m Macon Dead’s son. Not the
one you knew.”
She stopped smiling.
“My name is Macon Dead too, but I’m thirty-two years
old. You knew my father and his father too.” So far, so
good. His voice was the same. Now he needed only to
know if he had assessed the situation correctly. She did not
answer him. “You’re Circe, aren’t you?”
“Yes; Circe,” she said, but she seemed to have lost all
interest in him. “My name is Circe.”
“I’m just visiting,” he said. “I spent a couple of days with
Reverend Cooper and his wife. They’re the ones brought
me out here.”
“I thought you were him. I thought you came back to see
me. Where is he?
 My
 Macon?”“Back home. He’s alive. He told me about you….”
“And Pilate. Where is she?”
“There too. She’s fine.”
“Well, you look like him. You really do.” But she didn’t
sound convinced.
“He’s seventy-two years old now,” said Milkman. He
thought that would clear things up, make her know he
couldn’t be the Macon she knew, who was sixteen when
she last saw him. But all she said was “Uhn,” as though
seventy-two, thirty-two, any age at all, meant nothing
whatsoever to her. Milkman wondered how old she really
was.
“Are you hungry?” she asked.
“No. Thank you. I ate breakfast.”
“So you’ve been staying with that little Cooper boy?”
“Yes, ma’am.”
“A runt. I told him not to smoke, but children don’t listen.”
“Do you mind if I do?” Milkman was relaxing a little and
he hoped the cigarette would relax him more.She shrugged. “Do what you like. Everybody does what
he likes nowadays anyway.”
Milkman lit the cigarette and the dogs hummed at the
sound of the match, their eyes glittering toward the flame.
“Ssh!” whispered Circe.
“Beautiful,” said Milkman.
“What’s beautiful?”
“The dogs.”
“They’re not beautiful, they’re strange, but they keep
things away. I’m completely worn out taking care of ’em.
They belonged to Miss Butler. She bred them, crossbred
them. Tried for years to get them in the AKC. They wouldn’t
permit it.”
“What did you call them?”
“Weimaraners. German.”
“What do you do with them?”
“Oh, I keep some. Sell some. Till we all die in here
together.” She smiled.
She had dainty habits which matched her torn and filthyclothes in precisely the way her strong young cultivated
voice matched her wizened face. Her white hair—braided,
perhaps; perhaps not—she touched as though replacing a
wayward strand from an elegant coiffure. And her smile—
an opening of flesh like celluloid dissolving under a drop of
acid—was accompanied by a press of fingers on her chin.
It was this combination of daintiness and cultivated speech
that misled Macon and invited him to regard her as merely
foolish.
“You should get out once in a while.”
She looked at him.
“Is this your house now? Did they will you this? Is that why
you have to stay here?”
She pressed her lips over her gums. “The only reason I’m
here alone is because she died. She killed herself. All the
money was gone, so she killed herself. Stood right there on
the landing where you were a minute ago and threw herself
off the banister. She didn’t die right away, though; she lay in
the bed a week or two and there was nobody here but us.
The dogs were in the kennel then. I brought her in the world,
just like I did her mother and her grandmother before that.
Birthed just about everybody in the county, I did. Never lost
one either. Never lost nobody but your mother. Well,
grandmother, I guess she was. Now I birth dogs.”“Some friend of Reverend Cooper said she looked
white. My grandmother. Was she?”
“No. Mixed. Indian mostly. A good-looking woman, but
fierce, for the young woman I knew her as. Crazy about her
husband too, overcrazy. You know what I mean? Some
women love too hard. She watched over him like a
pheasant hen. Nervous. Nervous love.”
Milkman thought about this mixed woman’s great-
granddaughter, Hagar, and said, “Yes. I know what you
mean.”
“But a good woman. I cried like a baby when I lost her.
Like a baby. Poor Sing.”
“What?” He wondered if she lisped.
“I cried like a baby when I—”
“No. I mean what did you call her?”
“Sing. Her name was Sing.”
“Sing? Sing Dead. Where’d she get a name like that?”
“Where’d you get a name like yours? White people name
Negroes like race horses.”
“I suppose so. Daddy told me how they got their name.”“What’d he tell you?”
Milkman told her the story about the drunken Yankee.
“Well, he didn’t have to keep the name. She made him.
She made him keep that name,” Circe said when he was
through.
“She?”
“Sing. His wife. They met on a wagon going North. Ate
pecans all the way, she told me. It was a wagonful of ex-
slaves going to the promised land.”
“Was she a slave too?”
“No. No indeed. She always bragged how she was never
a slave. Her people neither.”
“Then what was she doing on that wagon?”
“I can’t answer you because I don’t know. Never crossed
my mind to ask her.”
“Where were they coming from? Georgia?”
“No. Virginia. Both of them lived in Virginia, her people
and his. Down around Culpeper somewhere. Charlemagne
or something like that.”“I think that’s where Pilate was for a while. She lived all
over the country before she came to us.”
“Did she ever marry that boy?”
“What boy?”
“The boy she had the baby by.”
“No. She didn’t marry him.”
“Didn’t think she would. She was too ashamed.”
“Ashamed of what?”
“Her stomach.”
“Oh, that.”
“Borned herself. I had very little to do with it. I thought they
were both dead, the mother and the child. When she
popped out you could have knocked me over. I hadn’t
heard a heartbeat anywhere. She just came on out. Your
daddy loved her. Hurt me to hear they broke away from one
another. So it does me good to hear they’re back together
again.” She had warmed up talking about the past and
Milkman decided not to tell her that Macon and Pilate just
lived in the same city. He wondered how she knew about
their split, and if she knew what they broke apart about.“You knew about their quarrel?” he asked quietly, non-
chalantly.
“Not the substance. Just the fact. Pilate came back here
just after her baby was born. One winter. She told me they
split up when they left here and she hadn’t seen him since.”
“Pilate told me they lived in a cave for a few days after
they left this house.”
“Is that right? Must have been Hunters Cave. Hunters
used it to rest up in there sometimes. Eat. Smoke. Sleep.
That’s where they dumped Old Macon’s body.”
“They who? I thought … My father said he buried him.
Down by a creek or a river someplace where they used to
fish.”
“He did. But it was too shallow and too close to the water.
The body floated up at the first heavy rain. Those children
hadn’t been gone a month when it floated up. Some men
were fishing down there and saw this body, a Negro. So
they knew who it was. Dumped it in the cave, and it was
summer too. You’d think they would have buried a body in
the summer. I told Mrs. Butler I thought it was a disgrace.”
“Daddy doesn’t know that.”
“Well, don’t tell him. Let him have his peace. It’s hard
enough with a murdered father; he don’t need to know whathappened to the body.”
“Did Pilate tell you why she came back here?”
“Yes. She said her father told her to. She had visits from
him, she said.”
“I’d like to see that cave. Where he’s … where they put
him.”
“Won’t be anything left to see now. That’s been a long
time ago.”
“I know, but maybe there’s something I can bury
properly.”
“Now, that’s a thought worth having. The dead don’t like it
if they’re not buried. They don’t like it at all. You won’t have
trouble finding it. You go back out the road you came in on.
Go north until you come to a stile. It’s falling down, but you’ll
see it’s a stile. Right in there the woods are open. Walk a
little way in and you’ll come to a creek. Cross it. There’ll be
some more woods, but ahead you’ll see a short range of
hills. The cave is right on the face of those hills. You can’t
miss it. It’s the only one there. Tell your daddy you buried
him properly, in a graveyard. Maybe with a headstone. A
nice headstone. I hope they find me soon enough and
somebody’ll take pity on me.” She looked at the dogs.
“Hope they find me soon and don’t let me lay in here too
long.”Milkman swallowed as her thought touched his mind.
“People come to see you, don’t they?”
“Dog buyers. They come every now and then. They’ll find
me, I guess.”
“Reverend Cooper…They think you’re dead.”
“Splendid. I don’t like those Negroes in town. Dog people
come and the man that delivers the dog food once a week.
They come. They’ll find me. I just hope it’s soon.”
He loosened his collar and lit another cigarette. Here in
this dim room he sat with the woman who had helped
deliver his father and Pilate; who had risked her job, her
life, maybe, to hide them both after their father was killed,
emptied their slop jars, brought them food at night and pans
of water to wash. Had even sneaked off to the village to
have the girl Pilate’s name and snuffbox made into an
earring. Then healed the ear when it got infected. And after
all these years was thrilled to see what she believed was
one of them. Healer, deliverer, in another world she would
have been the head nurse at Mercy. Instead she tended
Weimaraners and had just one selfish wish: that when she
died somebody would find her before the dogs ate her.
“You should leave this place. Sell the damn dogs. I’ll help
you. You need money? How much?” Milkman felt a flood of
pity and thought gratitude made her smile at him. But hervoice was cold.
“You think I don’t know how to walk when I want to walk?
Put your money back in your pocket.”
Rebuffed from his fine feelings, Milkman matched her
cold tone: “You loved those white folks that much?”
“Love?” she asked. “Love?”
“Well, what are you taking care of their dogs for?”
“Do you know why she killed herself? She couldn’t stand
to see the place go to ruin. She couldn’t live without
servants and money and what it could buy. Every cent was
gone and the taxes took whatever came in. She had to let
the upstairs maids go, then the cook, then the dog trainer,
then the yardman, then the chauffeur, then the car, then the
woman who washed once a week. Then she started selling
bits and pieces—land, jewels, furniture. The last few years
we ate out of the garden. Finally she couldn’t take it
anymore. The thought of having no help, no money—well,
she couldn’t take that. She had to let everything go.”
“But she didn’t let you go.” Milkman had no trouble letting
his words snarl.
“No, she didn’t let me go. She killed herself.”
“And you still loyal.”“You don’t listen to people. Your ear is on your head, but
it’s not connected to your brain. I said she killed herself
rather than do the work I’d been doing all my life!” Circe
stood up, and the dogs too. “Do you hear me? She saw the
work I did all her days and
 died,
 you hear me,
 died
 rather
than live like me. Now, what do you suppose she thought I
was! If the way I lived and the work I did was so hateful to
her she killed herself to keep from having to do it, and you
think I stay on here because I loved her, then you have
about as much sense as a fart!”
The dogs were humming and she touched their heads.
One stood on either side of her. “They loved this place.
Loved it. Brought pink veined marble from across the sea
for it and hired men in Italy to do the chandelier that I had to
climb a ladder and clean with white muslin once every two
months. They loved it. Stole for it, lied for it, killed for it. But
I’m the one left. Me and the dogs. And I will never clean it
again. Never. Nothing. Not a speck of dust, not a grain of
dirt, will I move. Everything in this world they lived for will
crumble and rot. The chandelier already fell down and
smashed itself to pieces. It’s down there in the ballroom
now. All in pieces. Something gnawed through the cords.
Ha! And I want to see it all go, make sure it does go, and
that nobody fixes it up. I brought the dogs in to make sure.
They keep strangers out too. Folks tried to get in here to
steal things after she died. I set the dogs on them. Then I
just brought them all right in here with me. You ought to seewhat they did to her bedroom. Her walls didn’t have
wallpaper. No. Silk brocade that took some Belgian women
six years to make. She loved it—oh, how much she loved it.
Took thirty Weimaraners one day to rip it off the walls. If I
thought the stink wouldn’t strangle you, I’d show it to you.”
She looked at the walls around her. “This is the last room.”
“I wish you’d let me help you,” he said after a while.
“You have. You came in here and pretended it didn’t stink
and told me about Macon and my sweet little Pilate.”
“Are you sure?”
“Never surer.”
They both stood and walked down the hall. “Mind how
you step. There’s no light.” Dogs came from everywhere,
humming. “Time for their feeding,” she said. Milkman
started down the stairs. Halfway down, he turned and
looked up at her.
“You said his wife made him keep the name. Did you
ever know his real name?”
“Jake, I believe.”
“Jake what?”
She shrugged, a Shirley Temple, little-girl-helpless shrug.“Jake was all she told me.”
“Thanks,” he called back, louder than he needed to, but
he wanted his gratitude to cut through the stink that was
flooding back over the humming of the dogs.
But the humming and the smell followed him all the way
back down the tunnel to the macadam road. When he got
there it was ten-thirty. Another hour and a half before
Nephew would be back. Milkman paced the shoulder of the
road, making plans. When should he return? Should he try
to rent a car or borrow the preacher’s? Had Nephew got his
suitcase? What equipment would he need? Flashlight and
what else? What story should be in his mind in case he was
discovered? Of course: looking for his grandfather’s
remains—to collect them and take them for a proper burial.
He paced further, and then began to stroll in the direction
Nephew would be coming from. After a few minutes, he
wondered if he was going the right way. He started back,
but just then saw the ends of two or three wooden planks
sticking out of the brush. Maybe this was the stile Circe had
described to him. Not exactly a stile, but the remains of
one. Circe had not left that house in years, he thought. Any
stile she knew of would have to be in disrepair now. And if
her directions were accurate, he might make it there and
back before twelve. At least he would be able to check it
out in the daylight.
Gingerly, he parted the brush and walked a little way intothe woods. He didn’t see even a trace of a track. But as he
kept on a bit, he heard water and followed the sound, which
seemed to be just ahead of the next line of trees. He was
deceived. He walked for fifteen minutes before he came to
it. “Cross it,” she’d said, and he thought there would be a
bridge of some sort. There was none. He looked across
and saw hills. It must be there. Right there. He calculated
that he could just make it in the hour or so left before he
should be back on the road. He sat down, took off his
shoes and socks, stuffed the socks in his pocket, and rolled
up his pants. Holding his shoes in his hand, he waded in.
Unprepared for the coldness of the water and the slimy
stones at the bottom, he slipped to one knee and soaked
his shoes trying to break his fall. He righted himself with
difficulty and poured the water out of his shoes. Since he
was already wet, there was no point in turning back; he
waded on out. After half a minute, the creek bed dropped
six inches and he fell again, only now he went completely
under and got a glimpse of small silvery translucent fish as
his head went down. Snorting water, he cursed the creek,
which was too shallow to swim and too rocky to walk. He
should have pulled a stick to check depth before he put his
foot down, but his excitement had been too great. He went
on, feeling with his toes for firm footing before he put his
weight down. It was slow moving—the water was about two
or three feet deep and some twelve yards wide. If he hadn’t
been so eager, maybe he could have found a narrower part
to cross. Thoughts of what he should have done instead of
just plunging in, fruitless as they were, irritated him so thatthey kept him moving until he made it to the other side. He
threw his shoes on the dry ground and hoisted himself up
and out on the bank. Breathless, he reached for his
cigarettes and found them soaked. He lay back on the
grass and let the high sunshine warm him. He opened his
mouth so the clear air could bathe his tongue.
After a while he sat up and put on the wet socks and
shoes. He looked at his watch to check the time. It ticked,
but the face was splintered and the minute hand was bent.
Better move, he thought, and struck out for the hills, which,
deceptive as the sound of the creek, were much farther
away than they seemed. He had no idea that simply
walking through trees, bushes, on untrammeled ground
could be so hard. Woods always brought to his mind City
Park, the tended woods on Honoré Island where he went
for outings as a child and where tiny convenient paths led
you through. “He leased ten acres of virgin woods and
cleared it all,” said the men describing the beginning of Old
Macon Dead’s farm. Cleared this? Chopped down this?
This stuff he could barely walk through?
He was sweating into his wet shirt and just beginning to
feel the result of sharp stones on his feet. Occasionally he
came to a clear space and he’d alter his direction as soon
as the low hills came back into view.
Finally flat ground gave way to a gentle upward slope of
bushes, saplings, and rock. He walked along its edge,looking for an opening. As he moved southward, the skirts
of the hills were rockier and the saplings fewer. Then he
saw, some fifteen to twenty feet above him, a black hole in
the rock which he could get to by a difficult, but not
dangerous, climb, made more difficult by the thin smooth
soles of his shoes. He wiped sweat from his forehead on
his coat sleeve, slipped off the narrow black tie that hung
open around his collar and put it in his pocket.
The salt taste was back in his mouth and he was so
agitated by what he believed, hoped, he would find there,
he had to put his hands on warm stone to dry them. He
thought of the pitiful hungry eyes of the old men, their
eagerness for some word of defiant success accomplished
by the son of Macon Dead; and of the white men who
strutted through the orchards and ate the Georgia peaches
after they shot his grandfather’s head off. Milkman took a
deep breath and began to negotiate the rocks.
As soon as he put his foot on the first stone, he smelled
money, although it was not a smell at all. It was like candy
and sex and soft twinkling lights. Like piano music with a
few strings in the background. He’d noticed it before when
he waited under the pines near Pilate’s house; more when
the moon lit up the green sack that hung like a kept promise
from her ceiling; and most when he tumbled lightly to the
floor, sack in hand. Las Vegas and buried treasure;
numbers dealers and Wells Fargo wagons; race track pay
windows and spewing oil wells; craps, flushes, andsweepstakes tickets. Auctions, bank vaults, and heroin
deals. It caused paralysis, trembling, dry throats, and
sweaty palms. Urgency, and the feeling that “they” had been
mastered or were on your side. Quiet men stood up and
threw a queen down on the table hard enough to break her
neck. Women sucked their bottom lips and put little red
disks down in numbered squares. Lifeguards, A-students,
eyed cash registers and speculated on how far away the
door was. To win. There was nothing like it in the world.
Milkman became agile, pulling himself up the rock face,
digging his knees into crevices, searching with his fingers
for solid earth patches or ledges of stone. He left off
thinking and let his body do the work. He stood up, finally,
on level ground twenty feet to the right of the mouth of the
cave. There he saw a crude footpath he might have found
earlier if he had not been so hasty. That was the path the
hunters used and that Pilate and his father had also used.
None of them tore their clothes as he had, climbing twenty
feet of steep rock.
He entered the cave and was blinded by the absence of
light. He stepped back out and reentered, cupping his
eyes. After a while, he could distinguish the ground from the
wall of the cave. There was the ledge of rock where they’d
slept, much larger than he had pictured. And worn places
on the floor where fires had once burned, and several
boulders standing around the entrance—one with a kind of
V-shaped crown. But where were the bones? Circe saidthey dumped him in here. Farther back, probably, back
where the shallow pit was. Milkman had no flashlight and
his matches were certainly wet, but he tried to find a dry
one anyway. Only one or two even sputtered. The rest were
dead. Still, his eyes were getting used to the dark. He
pulled a branch from a bush that grew near the entrance
and bending forward, let it graze the ground before him as
he walked. He had gone thirty or forty feet when he noticed
the cave’s walls were closer together. He could not see the
roof at all. He stopped and began to move slowly sideways,
the branch tip scratching a yard or so ahead. The side of
his hand grazed rock and he flung the dry bat shit off it and
moved to the left. The branch struck air. He stopped again,
and lowered the tip until it touched ground again. Raising it
up and down, and pressing it back and around, he could tell
that he had found the pit. It was about two feet deep and
maybe eight feet wide. Frantically he scraped the branch
around the bottom. It hit something hard, again something
else hard. Milkman swallowed and dropped to his knees.
He squinted his eyes as hard as he could, but he couldn’t
see a thing. Suddenly he remembered a lighter in his vest
pocket. He dropped the branch and fumbled for it, almost
faint from the money smell—the twinkling lights, the piano
music. He pulled it out, praying it would light. On the second
try, it burst into flame and he peered down. The lighter went
out. He snapped it back and held his hand over its fragile
flame. At the bottom of the hole he saw rocks, boards,
leaves, even a tin cup, but no gold. Stretched out on his
stomach, holding the lighter in one hand, he swept thebottom with the other, clawing, pulling, fingering, poking.
There were no fat little pigeon-breasted bags of gold. There
was nothing. Nothing at all. And before he knew it, he was
hollering a long,
 awwww
 sound into the pit. It triggered the
bats, which swooped suddenly and dived in the darkness
over his head. They startled him and he leaped to his feet,
whereupon the sole of his right shoe split away from the soft
cordovan leather. The bats drove him out in a lopsided run,
lifting his foot high to accommodate the flopping sole.
In the sunlight once more, he stopped for breath. Dust,
tears, and too bright light were in his eyes, but he was too
angry and disgusted to rub them. He merely threw the
lighter in a wide high arc into the trees at the foot of the hills
and limped down the footpath, paying no attention to the
direction he was going. He put his feet down wherever was
most convenient. Quite suddenly, it seemed to him, he was
at the creek again, but upstream where the crossing—
about twelve feet here and so shallow he could see the
stony bottom—was laid across with boards. He sat down
and lashed the sole of his shoe to its top with his black
string tie, then walked across the homemade bridge. The
woods on the other side had a pathway.
Milkman began to shake with hunger. Real hunger, not
the less than top-full feeling he was accustomed to, the
nervous desire to taste something good. Real hunger. He
believed if he didn’t get something to eat that instant he
would pass out. He examined the bushes, the branches, theground for a berry, a nut, anything. But he didn’t know what
to look for, nor how they grew. Trembling, his stomach in a
spasm, he tore off a few leaves and put them in his mouth.
They were as bitter as gall, but he chewed them anyway,
spit them out, and got others. He thought of the breakfast
food Mrs. Cooper had put before him, which had disgusted
him then. Fried eggs covered with grease, fresh-squeezed
orange juice with seed and pulp floating in it, thick hand-cut
bacon, a white-hot mound of grits and biscuits. It was her
best effort, he knew, but perhaps because of the whiskey
he’d drunk the night before, he could only bring himself to
drink two cups of black coffee and eat two biscuits. The
rest had nauseated him, and what he did eat he had left at
Circe’s door.
Some brush closed in on him and when he swept it
angrily aside, he saw a stile and the road in front of him.
Macadam, automobiles, fence posts, civilization. He
looked at the sky to gauge the hour. The sun was a quarter
of the way down from what even he knew was high noon.
About one o’clock, he guessed. Nephew would have come
and gone. He felt in his back pocket for his wallet. It was
discolored at the edges from the water, but the contents
were dry. Five hundred dollars, his driver’s license, phone
numbers on slips of paper, social security card, airline
ticket stub, cleaners receipts. He looked up and down the
road. He had to get food, and started walking south, where
he believed Danville lay, hoping to hitch as soon as a car
came by. He was not only ravenous; his feet hurt. The thirdcar to pass stopped—a 1954 Chevrolet—and the driver, a
black man, showed the same interest in Milkman’s clothes
that Nephew had shown. He seemed not to notice or care
about the rip at the knee or under the arm, the tie-tied shoe,
the leaves in Milkman’s hair, or the dirt all over the suit.
“Where you headed, partner?”
“Danville. As close as I can get.”
“Hop on in, then. Little out my way. I cut over to Buford,
but I’ll get you closer than you was.”
“’Preciate it,” answered Milkman. He loved the car seat,
loved it. And sank his weary back into its nylon and sighed.
“Good cut of suit,” the man said. “I guess you ain’t from
here’ bouts.”
“No. Michigan.”
“Sure ‘nough? Had a aunt move out there. Flint. You
know Flint?”
“Yeah. I know Flint.” Milkman’s feet were singing, the
tender skin of the ball louder than the heels. He dared not
spread his toes, lest the singing never stop.
“What kinda place is it, Flint?”“Jive. No place you’d want to go to.”
“Thought so. Name sounds good, but I thought it’d be like
that.”
Milkman had noticed a six-bottle carton of Coca-Cola on
the back seat when he got in the car. It was on his mind.
“Could I buy one of those Coca-Colas from you? I’m
kinda thirsty.”
“It’s warm,” said the man.
“Long as it’s wet.”
“Help yourself.”
Milkman reached around and pulled a bottle out of its
case.
“Got a bottle opener?”
The man took the bottle from him and put its head in his
mouth and slowly pried the top off. Foam shot all over his
chin and his lap before Milkman could take it from him.
“Hot.” The man laughed and wiped himself with a navy-
and-white handkerchief.
Milkman gulped the Coke, foam and all, in three or fourseconds.
“Like another?”
He did but he said no. Just a cigarette.
“Don’t smoke,” said the man.
“Oh,” said Milkman, and struggled against and lost to a
long belch.
“Bus station’s right around the bend there.” They were
just outside Danville. “You can make it easy.”
“I really do thank you.” Milkman opened the door. “What
do I owe you? For the Coke and all?”
The man was smiling, but his face changed now. “My
name’s Garnett, Fred Garnett. I ain’t got much, but I can
afford a Coke and a lift now and then.”
“I didn’t mean…I…”
But Mr. Garnett had reached over and closed the door.
Milkman could see him shaking his head as he drove off.
Milkman’s feet hurt him so, he could have cried, but he
made it to the diner/bus station and looked for the man
behind the counter. He wasn’t there, but a woman offered to
help. There followed a long discussion in which hediscovered that the bag was not there, the man was not
there, she didn’t know if a colored boy had picked it up or
not, they didn’t have a checkroom and she was mighty sorry
but he could look at the station-master’s if the boy didn’t
have it, and was there anything else she could do?
“Hamburgers,” he said. “Give me some hamburgers and
a cup of coffee.”
“Yes, sir. How many?”
“Six,” he said, but his stomach cramped on the fourth and
bent him double with a pain that lasted off and on all the
way to Roanoke. But before he left, he telephoned
Reverend Cooper. His wife answered and told him that her
husband was still at the freightyard and he could catch him
there if he hurried. Milkman thanked her and hung up.
Walking like a pimp in delicate shoes, he managed to get
to the yard, which was fairly close to the bus station. He
entered the gate and asked the first man he saw if
Reverend Cooper was still there.
“Coop?” the man said. “I think he went on over to the
station house. See it? Right over there.”
Milkman followed his finger, and hobbled over the gravel
and ties to the station house.
It was empty save for an old man dragging a crate.“Excuse me,” Milkman said. “Is Rev—is Coop still here?”
“Just left. If you run you can catch him,” the man said. He
wiped the sweat of exertion from his forehead.
Milkman thought about running anywhere on his tender
feet and said, “Oh, well. I’ll try to catch him another time.” He
turned to go.
“Say,” said the man. “If you ain’t gonna try to catch him,
could you give me a hand with this?” He pointed down to
the huge crate at his feet. Too tired to say no or explain,
Milkman nodded. The two of them grunted and groaned
over the box, and finally got it up on a dolly, where they
could push it to the weighing platform. Milkman slumped
over the crate and caught his breath, barely able to nod to
the old man’s thank yous. Then he went out of the station
into the street.
He was tired now. Really tired. He didn’t want to see
Reverend Cooper and his success-starved friends again.
And he certainly didn’t want to explain anything to his father
or Guitar just yet. So he hobbled back to the bus station
and asked for the next bus leaving that was going south. It
had to be south. And it had to be Virginia. Because now he
thought he knew how to find out what had happened to the
gold.
Full of hamburgers, sore of foot, sick to his stomach, butat least sitting down, he couldn’t even feel the
disappointment that lay in the pit in the cave. He slept
heavily for several hours on the bus, woke and
daydreamed, napped a little more, woke again at a rest
stop and ate a bowl of pea soup. He went into a drugstore
and replaced the shaving equipment and toilet articles he’d
left at Reverend Cooper’s, and decided to wait and get his
shoe fixed (it was sealed with chewing gum now), his suit
mended, and a new shirt in Virginia.
The Greyhound bus made a sound like the hum of the
Weimaraners as it sped down the road, and Milkman
shivered a little, the way he had when Circe glanced at
them, sitting in the “last room,” wondering if she would
outlive them. But there were over thirty of them and
reproducing all the time.
The low hills in the distance were no longer scenery to
him. They were real places that could split your thirty-dollar
shoes. More than anything in the world he’d wanted it to be
there, for row upon row of those little bags to turn their fat
pigeon chests up to his hands. He thought he wanted it in
the name of Macon Dead’s Georgia peaches, in the name
of Circe and her golden-eyed dogs, and especially in the
name of Reverend Cooper and his old-timey friends who
began to die before their facial hair was out when they saw
what happened to a black man like them—“ignorant as a
hammer and broke as a convict”—who had made it
anyway. He also thought he wanted it in the name of Guitar,to erase what looked like doubt in his face when Milkman
left, the “I-know-you-gonna-fuck-up” look. There wasn’t any
gold, but now he knew that all the fine reasons for wanting it
didn’t mean a thing. The fact was he wanted the gold
because it was gold and he wanted to own it. Free. As he
had sat chomping the hamburgers in the bus station,
imagining what going home would be like now—not only to
have to say there was no gold, but also to know he was
trapped there—his mind had begun to function clearly.
Circe said that Macon and Sing had boarded that wagon
in Virginia, where they both came from. She also said
Macon’s body rose up from the ground at the first heavy
rain, and that the Butlers, or somebody, dumped it in the
hunters’ cave one summer night. One summer night. And it
was a body, a corpse, when they hauled it away, because
they recognized him as a Negro. Yet Pilate said it was
winter when she was there, and there were only bones. She
said she went to see Circe and visited the cave four years
later, in the snow, and took the white man’s bones. Why
didn’t she see her father’s bones? There should have been
two skeletons. Did she step over one and collect the other?
Surely Circe had told her the same thing she told him—that
her father’s body was in the cave. Did Pilate tell Circe that
they had killed a man in there? Probably not, since Circe
didn’t mention it. Pilate said she took the white man’s
bones and didn’t even look for the gold. But she lied. She
had not mentioned the second skeleton because it wasn’t
there when she got to the cave. She didn’t come back fouryears later—or if she did, it was her second trip. She came
back
 before
 they dumped the Negro they found in the cave.
She took the bones, all right; Milkman had seen them on
the table in the jailhouse. But that’s not all she took. She
took the gold. To Virginia. And maybe somebody in
Virginia would know.
Milkman followed in her tracks.Chapter 11
The women’s hands were empty. No pocketbook, no
change purse, no wallet, no keys, no small paper bag, no
comb, no handkerchief. They carried nothing. Milkman had
never in his life seen a woman on the street without a purse
slung over her shoulder, pressed under her arm, or
dangling from her clenched fingers. These women walked
as if they were going somewhere, but they carried nothing
in their hands. It was enough to let him know he was really
in the backwoods of Virginia, an area the signs kept telling
him was the Blue Ridge Mountains. Danville, with its
diner/bus station and its post office on the main street was
a thriving metropolis compared to this no-name hamlet, a
place so small nothing financed by state funds or private
enterprise reared a brick there. In Roanoke, Petersburg,
Culpeper he’d asked for a town named Charlemagne.
Nobody knew. The coast, some said. Tidewater. A valley
town, said others. He ended up at an AAA office, and after
a while they discovered it and its correct name: Shalimar.
How do I get there? Well, you can’t walk it, that’s for sure.
Buses go there? Trains? No. Well, not very near. There is
one bus, but it just goes to…He ended up buying a fifty-
dollar car for seventy-five dollars out of a young man’s yard.
It broke down before he could get to the gas station and fill
the tank. And when he got pushed to the station, he spent
$132 on a fan belt, brake lining, oil filter, gas line filter, tworetreads, and a brand-new oil pan, which he didn’t need but
bought before the mechanic told him the gasket was
broken. It was a hard and bitter price to pay. Not because it
wasn’t worth it, and not because it had to be in cash since
the garage owner looked at his Standard Oil credit card
like it was a three-dollar bill, but because he had got used
to prices in the South: socks two pairs for a quarter,
resoled shoes thirty cents, shirt $1.98, and the two Tommys
needed to know that he got a shave
 and
 a haircut for fifty
cents.
By the time he bought the car, his morale had soared
and he was beginning to enjoy the trip: his ability to get
information and help from strangers, their attraction to him,
their generosity (Need a place to stay? Want a good place
to eat?). All that business about southern hospitality was for
real. He wondered why black people ever left the South.
Where he went, there wasn’t a white face around, and the
Negroes were as pleasant, wide-spirited, and self-
contained as could be. He earned the rewards he got here.
None of the pleasantness was directed at him because of
his father, as it was back home, or his grandfather’s
memory, as it was in Danville. And now, sitting behind a
steering wheel, he felt even better. He was his own director
—relieving himself when he wanted to, stopping for cold
beer when he was thirsty, and even in a seventy-five-dollar
car the sense of power was strong.
He’d had to pay close attention to signs and landmarks,because Shalimar was not on the Texaco map he had, and
the AAA office couldn’t give a nonmember a charted
course—just the map and some general information. Even
at that, watching as carefully as he could, he wouldn’t have
known he had arrived if the fan belt hadn’t broken again
right in front of Solomon’s General Store, which turned out
to be the heart and soul of Shalimar, Virginia.
He headed for the store, nodding at the four men sitting
outside on the porch, and side-stepping the white hens that
were strolling about. Three more men were inside, in
addition to the man behind the counter, who he assumed
was Mr. Solomon himself. Milkman asked him for a cold
bottle of Red Cap, please.
“No beer for sale on Sunday,” the man said. He was a
light-skinned Negro with red hair turning white.
“Oh. I forgot what day it was.” Milkman smiled. “Pop,
then. I mean soda. Got any on ice?”
“Cherry smash. That suit you?”
“Fine. Suit me fine.”
The man walked over to the side of the store and slid
open the door of an ancient cooler. The floor was worn and
wavy with years of footsteps. Cans of goods on the shelf
were sparse, but the sacks, trays, and cartons of
perishables and semiperishables were plentiful. The manpulled a bottle of red liquid from the cooler and wiped it dry
on his apron before handing it to Milkman.
“A nickel if you drink it here. Seven cents if you don’t.”
“I’ll drink it here.”
“Just get in?”
“Yeah. Car broke down. Is there a garage nearby?”
“Naw. Five miles yonder is one, though.”
“Five miles?”
“Yep. What’s the trouble? Mebbe one a us can fix it.
Where you headed?”
“Shalimar.”
“You standin in it.”
“Right here? This is Shalimar?”
“Yes, suh. Shalimar.” The man pronounced it
Shalleemone.
“Good thing I broke down. I would have missed it for
sure.” Milkman laughed.
“Your friend almost missed it too.”“My friend? What friend?”
“The one lookin for you. Drove in here early this mornin
and axed for ya.”
“Asked for me by name?”
“No. He never mentioned your name.”
“Then how do you know he was looking for me?”
“Said he was lookin for his friend in a three-piece beige
suit. Like that.” He pointed to Milkman’s chest.
“What’d he look like?”
“Dark-skinned man. ‘Bout your complexion. Tall. Thin.
What’s a matter? Y’all get your wires crossed?”
“Yeah. No. I mean … what was his name?”
“Didn’t say. Just asked for you. He come a long way to
meet you, though. I know that. Drove a Ford with Michigan
tags.”
“Michigan? You sure Michigan?”
“Sure I’m sure. Was he supposed to meet you in
Roanoke?”When Milkman looked wild-eyed, the man said, “I seen
your tags.”
Milkman sighed with relief. And then said, “I wasn’t sure
where we were going to meet up. And he didn’t say his
name?”
“Naw. Just said to give you some good-luck message if I
was to see you. Lemme see…”
“Good luck?”
“Yeah. Said to tell you your day was sure coming or your
day…something like that…your day is here. But I know it
had a day in it. But I ain’t sure if he said it was comin or was
already here.” He chuckled. “Wish mine was here. Been
waitin fifty-seven years and it ain’t come yet.”
The other men in the store laughed congenially, while
Milkman stood frozen, everything in him quiet but his heart.
There was no mistaking the message. Or the messenger.
Guitar was looking for him, was following him, and for
professional reasons. Unless … Would Guitar joke about
that phrase? That special secret word the Seven Days
whispered to their victims?
“The drink abuse you?” Mr. Solomon was looking at him.
“Sweet soda water don’t agree with me.”
Milkman shook his head and swallowed the resthurriedly. “No,” he said. “I’m just…car weary. I think I’ll sit
outside awhile.” He started toward the door.
“You want me to see ‘bout your car for you?” Mr.
Solomon sounded slightly offended.
“In a minute. I’ll be right back.”
Milkman pushed the screen door and stepped outside on
the porch. The sun was blazing. He took off his jacket and
held it on his forefinger over his shoulder. He gazed up and
down the dusty road. Shotgun houses with wide spaces
between them, a few dogs, chickens, children, and the
women with nothing in their hands. They sat on porches,
and walked in the road swaying their hips under cotton
dresses, bare-legged, their unstraightened hair braided or
pulled straight back into a ball. He wanted one of them bad.
To curl up in a cot in that one’s arms, or that one, or that.
That’s the way Pilate must have looked as a girl, looked
even now, but out of place in the big northern city she had
come to. Wide sleepy eyes that tilted up at the corners,
high cheekbones, full lips blacker than their skin, berry-
stained, and long long necks. There must be a lot of
intermarriage in this place, he thought. All the women
looked alike, and except for some light-skinned red-
headed men (like Mr. Solomon), the men looked very much
like the women. Visitors to Shalimar must be rare, and new
blood that settled here nonexistent.Milkman stepped off the porch, scattering the hens, and
walked down the road toward a clump of trees near a
building that looked like a church or clubhouse of some
sort. Children were playing behind the trees. Spreading his
jacket on the burnt grass, he sat down and lit a cigarette.
Guitar was here. Had asked for him. But why was he
afraid? They were friends, close friends. So close he had
told him all about the Seven Days. There was no trust
heavier than that. Milkman was a confidant, almost an
accomplice. So why was he afraid? It was senseless.
Guitar must have left that particular message so Milkman
could know who was looking for him without his giving his
name. Something must have happened back home. Guitar
must be running, from the police, maybe, and decided to
run toward his friend—the only one other than the Days who
would know what it was all about and whom he could trust.
Guitar needed to find Milkman and he needed help. That
was it. But if Guitar knew Milkman was headed for
Shalimar, he must have found that out in Roanoke, or
Culpeper—or maybe even in Danville. And if he knew that,
why didn’t he wait? Where was he now? Trouble. Guitar
was in trouble.
Behind him the children were singing a kind of ring-
around-the-rosy or Little Sally Walker game. Milkman
turned to watch. About eight or nine boys and girls were
standing in a circle. A boy in the middle, his arms
outstretched, turned around like an airplane, while theothers sang some meaningless rhyme:
Jay the only son of Solomon
Come booba yalle, come booba tambee
Whirl about and touch the sun
Come booba yalle, come booba tambee
…
They went on with several verses, the boy in the middle
doing his imitation of an airplane. The climax of the game
was a rapid shouting of nonsense words accompanied by
more rapid twirling: “Solomon rye balaly
 shoo
; yaraba
medina hamlet
 too
”—until the last line. “Twenty-one children
the last one
 Jay!
” At which point the boy crashed to earth
and the others screamed.
Milkman watched the children. He’d never played like
that as a child. As soon as he got up off his knees at the
window sill, grieving because he could not fly, and went off
to school, his velvet suit separated him from the other
children. White and black thought he was a riot and went
out of their way to laugh at him and see to it that he had no
lunch to eat, nor any crayons, nor ever got through the line
to the toilet or the water fountain. His mother finally
surrendered to his begging for corduroy knickers orstraights, which helped a little, but he was never asked to
play those circle games, those singing games, to join in
anything, until Guitar pulled those four boys off him. Milkman
smiled, remembering how Guitar grinned and whooped as
the four boys turned on him. It was the first time Milkman
saw anybody really enjoy a fight. Afterward Guitar had
taken off his baseball cap and handed it to Milkman, telling
him to wipe the blood from his nose. Milkman bloodied the
cap, returned it, and Guitar slapped it back on his head.
Remembering those days now, Milkman was ashamed
of having been frightened or suspicious of Guitar’s
message. When he turned up, he would explain everything
and Milkman would do what he could to help. He stood up
and brushed his jacket. A black rooster strutted by, its
blood-red comb draped forward like a wicked brow.
Milkman walked back toward Solomon’s store. He
needed a place to stay, some information, and a woman,
not necessarily in that order. He would begin wherever the
beginning was. In a way it was good Guitar had asked for
him. Along with waiting for him and waiting for some way to
get a new fan belt, he had a legitimate reason to dawdle.
Hens and cats gave up their places on the steps as he
approached them.
“Feelin better, are ya?” asked Mr. Solomon.
“Much better. Just needed a stretch, I guess.” He juttedhis chin toward the window. “Nice around here. Peaceful.
Pretty women too.”
A young man sitting on a chair tilted to the wall pushed
his hat back from his forehead and let the front legs of the
chair hit the floor. His lips were open, exposing the
absence of four front teeth. The other men moved their feet.
Mr. Solomon smiled but didn’t say anything. Milkman
sensed that he’d struck a wrong note. About the women, he
guessed. What kind of place was this where a man couldn’t
even ask for a woman?
He changed the subject. “If my friend, the one who
stopped by this morning, was going to wait for me here,
where would he be likely to find a place to stay? Any
rooming houses around here?”
“Rooming houses?”
“Yeah. Where a man can spend the night.”
Mr. Solomon shook his head. “Nothin like that here.”
Milkman was getting annoyed. What was all the hostility
for? He looked at the men sitting around the store. “You
think maybe one of them could help with the car?” he asked
Mr. Solomon. “Maybe get another belt somewhere?”
Mr. Solomon kept his eyes on the counter. “Guess I could
ask them.” His voice was soft; he spoke as if he wasembarrassed about something. There was none of the
earlier chattiness he’d been full of when Milkman arrived.
“If they can’t find one, let me know right away. I may have
to buy another car to get back home.”
Every one of the faces of the men turned to look at him,
and Milkman knew he had said something else wrong,
although he didn’t know what. He only knew that they
behaved as if they’d been insulted.
In fact they had been. They looked with hatred at the city
Negro who could buy a car as if it were a bottle of whiskey
because the one he had was broken. And what’s more,
who had said so in front of them. He hadn’t bothered to say
his name, nor ask theirs, had called them “them,” and would
certainly despise their days, which should have been spent
harvesting their own crops, instead of waiting around the
general store hoping a truck would come looking for mill
hands or tobacco pickers in the flatlands that belonged to
somebody else. His manner, his clothes were reminders
that they had no crops of their own and no land to speak of
either. Just vegetable gardens, which the women took care
of, and chickens and pigs that the children took care of. He
was telling them that they weren’t men, that they relied on
women and children for their food. And that the lint and
tobacco in their pants pockets where dollar bills should
have been was the measure. That thin shoes and suits with
vests and smooth smooth hands were the measure. Thateyes that had seen big cities and the inside of airplanes
were the measure. They had seen him watching their
women and rubbing his fly as he stood on the steps. They
had also seen him lock his car as soon as he got out of it in
a place where there couldn’t be more than two keys twenty-
five miles around. He hadn’t found them fit enough or good
enough to want to know their names, and believed himself
too good to tell them his. They looked at his skin and saw it
was as black as theirs, but they knew he had the heart of
the white men who came to pick them up in the trucks when
they needed anonymous, faceless laborers.
Now one of them spoke to the Negro with the Virginia
license and the northern accent.
“Big money up North, eh?”
“Some,” Milkman answered.
“Some? I hear tell everybody up North got big money.”
“Lotta people up North got nothing.” Milkman made his
voice pleasant, but he knew something was developing.
“That’s hard to believe. Why would anybody want to stay
there if they ain’t no big money?”
“The sights, I guess.” Another man answered the first.
“The sights and the women.”“You kiddin,” said the first man in mock dismay. “You
mean to tell me pussy different up North?”
“Naw,” said the second. “Pussy the same everywhere.
Smell like the ocean; taste like the sea.”
“Can’t be,” said a third. “Got to be different.”
“Maybe the pricks is different.” The first man spoke
again.
“Reckon?” asked the second man.
“So I hear tell,” said the first man.
“How different?” asked the second man.
“Wee little,” said the first man. “Wee, wee little.”
“Naw!” said the second man.
“So they tell me. That’s why they pants so tight. That
true?” The first man looked at Milkman for an answer.
“I wouldn’t know,” said Milkman. “I never spent much time
smacking my lips over another man’s dick.” Everybody
smiled, including Milkman. It was about to begin.
“What about his ass hole? Ever smack your lips over
that?”“Once,” said Milkman. “When a little young nigger made
me mad and I had to jam a Coke bottle up his ass.”
“What’d you use a bottle for? Your cock wouldn’t fill it?”
“It did. After I took the Coke bottle out. Filled his mouth
too.”
“Prefer mouth, do you?”
“If it’s big enough, and ugly enough, and belongs to a
ignorant motherfucker who is about to get the livin shit
whipped out of him.”
The knife glittered.
Milkman laughed. “I ain’t seen one of those since I was
fourteen. Where I come from
 boys
 play with knives—if they
scared they gonna lose, that is.”
The first man smiled. “That’s me, motherfucker. Scared
to death I’m gonna lose.”
Milkman did the best he could with a broken bottle, but
his face got slit, so did his left hand, and so did his pretty
beige suit, and he probably would have had his throat cut if
two women hadn’t come running in screaming, “Saul! Saul!”
The store was full of people by then and the women
couldn’t get through. The men tried to shush them, but theykept on screaming and provided enough lull for Mr.
Solomon to interrupt the fight.
“All right. All right. That’s enough of that.”
“Shut your mouth, Solomon.”
“Get them women outta here.”
“Stick him, Saul, stick that cocksucker.”
But Saul had a jagged cut over his eye and the blood
pouring from it made it hard to see. It was difficult but not
impossible for Mr. Solomon to pull him away. He left
cursing Milkman, but his fervor was gone.
Milkman backed up against the counter, waiting to see if
anybody else was going to jump him. When it looked as if
no one was, and when the people were drifting outside to
watch Saul scuffling and cursing at the men pulling him
away, he slumped a little and wiped his face. When the
entire store save for the owner was empty, Milkman hurled
the broken bottle into a corner. It careened by the cooler
and bounced off the wall before splintering on the floor. He
walked outside, still panting, and looked around. Four older
men still sat on the porch, as though nothing had happened.
Blood was streaming down Milkman’s face, but it had dried
on his hand. He kicked at a white hen and sat down on the
top step, wiping the blood with his handkerchief. Three
young women with nothing in their hands stood in the roadlooking at him. Their eyes were wide but noncommittal.
Children joined them, circling the women like birds. Nobody
said anything. Even the four men on the porch were quiet.
Nobody came toward him, offered him a cigarette or a
glass of water. Only the children and the hens walked
around. Under the hot sun, Milkman was frozen with anger.
If he’d had a weapon, he would have slaughtered
everybody in sight.
“You pretty good with a bottle. How you with a shotgun?”
One of the older men had sidled up to him. The smile on his
face was faint. It was as though now that the young men had
had their chance, with unsatisfactory results, the older men
would take over. Their style, of course, would be different.
No name-calling toilet contest for them. No knives either, or
hot breath and knotted neck muscles. They would test him,
match and beat him, probably, on some other ground.
“Best shot there is,” Milkman lied.
“That so?”
“Yeah, it’s so.”
“Some of us is going huntin later on. Care to join us?”
“That toothless motherfucker going too?”
“Saul? No.”“Cause I might have to knock the rest of them out.”
The man laughed. “Sheriff took the others—with the butt
of a gun.”
“Yeah? Good.”
“Well, you comin?”
“Sure I’m coming. Just get me the gun.”
He laughed again. “Name’s Omar.”
“Macon Dead.”
Omar blinked at the name, but didn’t comment on it. He
merely told him to come by King Walker’s, a gas station
about two miles up the road, right around sundown. “It’s
straight up yonder. Ain’t no way in the world you can miss
it.”
“I won’t miss it.” Milkman stood up and walked to his car.
He fumbled for the car keys, opened the door, and slid into
the seat. He rolled down all four windows, found a towel in
the back seat, and stretched out, using his jacket for a
pillow and the towel as a bandage for his face. His feet
stuck out the open door. Fuck ’em. Who were all these
people roaming the world trying to kill him? His own father
had tried while he was still in his mother’s stomach. But
he’d lived. And he had lived the last year dodging a womanwho came every month to kill him, and he had lain just like
this, with his arm over his eyes, wide open to whatever she
had in her hand. He’d lived through that too. Then a witch
had stepped out of his childhood nightmares to grab him,
and he’d lived through that. Some bats had driven him out
of a cave–and he’d lived through that. And at no time did he
have a weapon. Now he walked into a store and asked if
somebody could fix his car and a nigger pulled a knife on
him. And he still wasn’t dead. Now what did these black
Neanderthals think they were going to do? Fuck ’em. My
name’s Macon; I’m already dead. He had thought this
place, this Shalimar, was going to be home. His original
home. His people came from here, his grandfather and his
grandmother. All the way down South people had been nice
to him, generous, helpful. In Danville they had made him the
object of hero worship. In his own home town his name
spelled dread and grudging respect. But here, in his
“home,” he was unknown, unloved, and damn near killed.
These were some of the meanest unhung niggers in the
world.
He slept, unmolested by everything and everybody
except a dream in which he thought he saw Guitar looking
down on him. When he woke he bought two cans of
pineapple and a box of crackers from Mr. Solomon. He ate
on the porch with the hens. The men were gone, and the
sun was leaving. Only the children stayed to watch him eat.
When he poured the last of the pineapple juice down his
throat, one of the children stepped forward to ask, “Can wehave your can, mister?” He held it out and they snatched the
can and ran off to fashion some game out of it.
He started out for King Walker’s. Even if he could have
come up with a way to get out of the hunt, he wouldn’t have
taken it, in spite of the fact that he had never handled a
firearm in his life. He had stopped evading things, sliding
through, over, and around difficulties. Before he had taken
risks only with Guitar. Now he took them alone. Not only had
he let Hagar stab him; he had let the nightmare witch catch
him and kiss him. To a man surviving that, anything else
was a joke.
King Walker was nothing like his name suggested. He
was a small man, bald, with a left cheek bulging with
tobacco. Years ago he’d been a star pitcher in one of the
black baseball leagues and the history of his career was
nailed and pasted all over his shop. They had not lied when
they said no garage or mechanic on duty was nearer than
five miles. King Walker’s station had obviously gone broke
a long time ago. The pumps were dry; there wasn’t even a
can of oil in the place. Now it seemed to be used as a kind
of clubhouse for the men and Walker lived in the back of the
station. In addition to King Walker, who wasn’t going, there
was Omar and another man who had also been on the
porch and who introduced himself as Luther Solomon—no
relation to the grocery store Solomon. They were waiting for
some others, who came soon after Milkman got there,
driving an old Chevy. Omar introduced them as CalvinBreakstone and Small Boy.
Calvin seemed to be the most congenial of them, and
followed the introductions with a command to King Walker
to “get this city boy some shoes for his feet.” King
rummaged around, spitting tobacco, and came up with
some mud-caked brogans. They outfitted Milkman
completely, laughing all the while at his underwear,
fingering his vest—Small Boy tried to get his wrestler’s
arms into Milkman’s jacket—and wondering what had
happened to his feet. Bits of skin still peeled from his toes
because of the two days he had spent in wet shoes and
socks. King Walker made him sprinkle Arm & Hammer
soda on them before he put on the thick socks they gave
him. When Milkman was dressed in World War II army
fatigues with a knit cap on his head, they opened some
Falstaff beer and began to talk about guns. At which point
the revelry mixed with meanness abated and King Walker
handed Milkman his Winchester .22.
“Ever use a twenty-two?”
“Not in a good while,” Milkman said.
The five men piled into the Chevy and drove off into the
lessening light. From what Milkman could tell, after fifteen
minutes or so they were going up to high ground. As the car
swerved through narrow roads, the conversation picked up
again and they talked about other trips, game, kills, misses.Soon the only light came from the moon and it was getting
cool enough for Milkman to be grateful for his knit cap. The
car pulled ahead and around some sharp bends. In the
rear-view mirror Milkman thought he glimpsed the
headlights of another car and wondered briefly if they were
being met by others. The sky was dark enough now for
stars.
“Better make time, Calvin. Coon be done ate and gone
on home.”
Calvin pulled over and stopped the car.
“Let ’em rip,” he said, and handed the car keys to Small
Boy, who walked around to the back and unlocked the
trunk. Three hounds leaped out, sniffing and wagging their
tails. But they didn’t make a sound.
“You brought Becky?” asked Luther. “Oh, man! We
gonna get some coon tonight!”
The dogs’ nervousness, their eagerness to hear the
signal that would allow them to race off into the trees, made
Milkman jittery. What was he supposed to do? Two feet in
any direction from the headlights was black night.
Omar and Small Boy hauled equipment from the trunk:
four lamps, one flashlight, rope, shells, and a pint bottle of
liquor. When all four lamps were ablaze, they asked
Milkman if he wanted to use a lamp or a flashlight. Hehesitated, and Calvin said, “He can run with me. Give him
the torch.”
Milkman put it in his back pocket.
“Take that change out your pocket,” said Calvin. “Makes
too much noise.”
Milkman did as he was told and took King’s shotgun, a
piece of rope, and a deep swig from the bottle they were
passing around.
The dogs padded about, silent, panting, almost faint with
excitement. But still they made no sound. Calvin and Omar
both loaded their double-gauge shotguns with .22 shells in
one barrel and buckshot in the other. Small Boy clapped his
hands once, and the three hounds sped screaming into the
night. The men didn’t take off after them at once, as
Milkman had supposed they would. Instead they stood
quietly and listened for a while. Small Boy laughed lightly,
shaking his head. “Becky’s leadin. Let’s go. Calvin, you and
Macon go off to the right. We’ll head this a way, and circle
over by the gulch. Don’t shoot no bears, now.”
“Shoot him if I see him,” said Calvin as he and Milkman
moved away.
As they left the Chevy, the car that Milkman had noticed
sped past them. Obviously, there were no others in the
hunting party. Calvin was ahead, the burning lamp swinginglow from his hand. Milkman flicked on his flashlight.
“Better save it,” said Calvin. “You don’t need it now.”
They plodded on in a direction that may have been
toward the screaming dogs, but Milkman couldn’t tell.
“Any bears out here?” he asked in what he hoped was an
interested but not anxious voice.
“Just us, and we got the guns.” Calvin laughed and was
suddenly swallowed up by the dark, only the low swinging
lamp marking his path. Milkman watched the lamp until he
realized that focusing on it kept him from seeing anything
else. If he was to grow accustomed to the dark, he would
have to look at what it was possible to see. A long moan
sailed up through the trees somewhere to the left of where
they were. It sounded like a woman’s voice, sobbing, and
mingling with the dogs’ yelps and the men’s shouts. A few
minutes later, the distant screaming of the dogs and the
calls of the three men stopped. There was only the
soughing wind and his and Calvin’s footsteps. It took
Milkman a while to figure out how to pick up his feet and
miss the roots and stones; to distinguish a tree from a
shadow; to keep his head down and away from the
branches that swept back from Calvin’s hand into his face.
They were walking upland. Every now and then Calvin
stopped, threw his lamplight on a tree, and examined it
closely from about three feet off the ground to up as far ashis arm could go. Other times he lowered the lamp over the
ground, and squatting down on his haunches, peered into
the dirt. Each time he seemed to be whispering. Whatever
he discovered he kept to himself and Milkman didn’t ask
him. All he wanted to do was keep up, be ready to shoot
whatever the game was when it appeared, and look out for
an attempt any of them might make on his life. Within an
hour after arriving in Shalimar, a young man had tried to kill
him in public. What these older men, under cover of night,
were capable of he could only guess.
He heard the sound of the sobbing woman again and
asked Calvin, “What the hell is that?”
“Echo,” he said. “Ryna’s Gulch is up ahead. It makes that
sound when the wind hits a certain way.”
“Sounds like a woman crying,” said Milkman.
“Ryna. Folks say a woman name Ryna is cryin in there.
That’s how it got the name.”
Calvin stopped, but so suddenly that Milkman, deep in
thought about Ryna, bumped into him. “Hush!” Calvin
closed his eyes and tilted his head into the wind. All
Milkman could hear was the dogs again, yelping, but more
rapidly, he thought, than before. Calvin whistled. A faint
whistle came back to them.
“Son of a fuckin bitch!” Calvin’s voice broke withagitation. “Bobcat! Come on, man!” He literally sprang
away and Milkman did the same. Now they moved at
double time, still on land that sloped upward. It was the
longest trek Milkman had ever made in his life. Miles, he
thought; we must be covering miles. And hours; it must be
two hours now since he whistled. On they walked, and
Calvin never broke his stride for anything except an
occasional shout and an occasional pause to listen to the
sound that came back.
The light was changing and Milkman was getting very
tired. The distance between himself and Calvin’s lamp was
getting wider and wider. He was twenty years younger than
Calvin, but found himself unable to keep up the pace. And
he was getting clumsy—stepping over big stones rather
than around them, dragging his feet and catching them in
humped roots, and now that Calvin was not directly in front,
he had to push the branches away from his face himself.
The doubling down and under branches and pushing things
out of his way were as exhausting as the walk. His breath
was coming in shorter and shorter gasps and he wanted to
sit down more than anything in the world. He believed they
were circling now, for it seemed to him that this was the
third time he had seen that double-humped rock in the
distance. Should they be circling? he wondered. Then he
thought he remembered hearing that certain prey circled
when it was being stalked. Did bobcat? He didn’t even
know what a bobcat looked like.At last he surrendered to his fatigue and made the
mistake of sitting down instead of slowing down, for when
he got up again, the rest had given his feet an opportunity
to hurt him and the pain in his short leg was so great he
began to limp and hobble. Soon it wasn’t possible for him
to walk longer than five minutes at a time without pausing to
lean against a sweet gum tree. Calvin was a pinpoint of
light bobbing ahead in and out of the trees. Finally Milkman
could take no more; he had to rest. At the next tree he sank
down to the ground and put his head back on its bark. Let
them laugh if they wanted to; he would not move until his
heart left from under his chin and went back down into his
chest where it belonged. He spread his legs, pulled the
flashlight out of his hip pocket, and put his Winchester down
near his right leg. At rest now, he could feel the blood
pulsing in his temple and the cut on his face stinging in the
night wind from the leaf juice and tree sap the branches had
smeared on it.
When he was breathing almost normally, he began to
wonder what he was doing sitting in the middle of a woods
in Blue Ridge country. He had come here to find traces of
Pilate’s journey, to find relatives she might have visited, to
find anything he could that would either lead him to the gold
or convince him that it no longer existed. How had he got
himself involved in a hunt, involved in a knife-and-broken-
bottle fight in the first place? Ignorance, he thought, and
vanity. He hadn’t been alert early enough, hadn’t seen the
signs jutting out everywhere around him. Maybe this was amean bunch of black folk, but he should have guessed it,
sensed it, and part of the reason he hadn’t was the easy,
good treatment he had received elsewhere. Or had he?
Maybe the glow of hero worship (twice removed) that had
bathed him in Danville had also blinded him. Perhaps the
eyes of the men in Roanoke, Petersburg, Newport News,
had not been bright with welcome and admiration. Maybe
they were just curious or amused. He hadn’t stayed in any
place long enough to find out. A meal here, gas there—the
one real contact was the buying of the car, and the seller
needing a buyer would naturally be friendly under those
circumstances. The same thing held when he’d had to have
those elaborate repairs. What kind of savages were these
people? Suspicious. Hot-tempered. Eager to find fault and
despise any outsider. Touchy. Devious, jealous, traitorous,
and evil. He had done nothing to deserve their contempt.
Nothing to deserve the explosive hostility that engulfed him
when he said he might have to buy a car. Why didn’t they
respond the way the man in Roanoke did when he bought
the car? Because in Roanoke he did not have a car. Here
he had one and wanted another, and perhaps it was that
that upset them. Furthermore, he hadn’t even suggested
that he would trade the old one in. He had hinted that he
would abandon the “broken” one and just get another. But
so what? What business was it of theirs what he did with
his money? He didn’t deserve …
It sounded old.
 Deserve.
 Old and tired and beaten to
death. Deserve. Now it seemed to him that he was alwayssaying or thinking that he didn’t deserve some bad luck, or
some bad treatment from others. He’d told Guitar that he
didn’t “deserve” his family’s dependence, hatred, or
whatever. That he didn’t even “deserve” to hear all the
misery and mutual accusations his parents unloaded on
him. Nor did he “deserve” Hagar’s vengeance. But why
shouldn’t his parents tell him their personal problems? If not
him, then who? And if a stranger could try to kill him, surely
Hagar, who knew him and whom he’d thrown away like a
wad of chewing gum after the flavor was gone—she had a
right to try to kill him too.
Apparently he thought he deserved only to be loved—
from a distance, though—and given what he wanted. And in
return he would…what? Pleasant? Generous? Maybe all he
was really saying was: I am not responsible for your pain;
share your happiness with me but not your unhappiness.
They were troublesome thoughts, but they wouldn’t go
away. Under the moon, on the ground, alone, with not even
the sound of baying dogs to remind him that he was with
other people, his self—the cocoon that was “personality”—
gave way. He could barely see his own hand, and couldn’t
see his feet. He was only his breath, coming slower now,
and his thoughts. The rest of him had disappeared. So the
thoughts came, unobstructed by other people, by things,
even by the sight of himself. There was nothing here to help
him—not his money, his car, his father’s reputation, his suit,
or his shoes. In fact they hampered him. Except for hisbroken watch, and his wallet with about two hundred
dollars, all he had started out with on his journey was gone:
his suitcase with the Scotch, the shirts, and the space for
bags of gold; his snap-brim hat, his tie, his shirt, his three-
piece suit, his socks, and his shoes. His watch and his two
hundred dollars would be of no help out here, where all a
man had was what he was born with, or had learned to use.
And endurance. Eyes, ears, nose, taste, touch—and some
other sense that he knew he did not have: an ability to
separate out, of all the things there were to sense, the one
that life itself might depend on. What did Calvin see on the
bark? On the ground? What was he saying? What did he
hear that made him know something unexpected had
happened some two miles—perhaps more—away, and
that that something was a different kind of prey, a bobcat?
He could still hear them—the way they had sounded the last
few hours. Signaling one another. What were they saying?
“Wait up?” “Over here?” Little by little it fell into place. The
dogs, the men—none was just hollering, just signaling
location or pace. The men and the dogs were talking to
each other. In distinctive voices they were saying
distinctive, complicated things. That long
 yah
 sound was
followed by a specific kind of howl from one of the dogs.
The low
 howm howm
 that sounded like a string bass
imitating a bassoon meant something the dogs understood
and executed. And the dogs spoke to the men: single-shot
barks—evenly spaced and widely spaced—one every
three or four minutes, that might go on for twenty minutes. A
sort of radar that indicated to the men where they were andwhat they saw and what they wanted to do about it. And the
men agreed or told them to change direction or to come
back. All those shrieks, those rapid tumbling barks, the long
sustained yells, the tuba sounds, the drumbeat sounds, the
low liquid
 howm howm,
 the reedy whistles, the thin eeeee’s
of a cornet, the
 unh unh unh
 bass chords. It was all
language. An extension of the click people made in their
cheeks back home when they wanted a dog to follow them.
No, it was not language; it was what there was before
language. Before things were written down. Language in
the time when men and animals did talk to one another,
when a man could sit down with an ape and the two
converse; when a tiger and a man could share the same
tree, and each understood the other; when men ran
 with
wolves, not from or after them. And he was hearing it in the
Blue Ridge Mountains under a sweet gum tree. And if they
could talk to animals, and the animals could talk to them,
what didn’t they know about human beings? Or the earth
itself, for that matter. It was more than tracks Calvin was
looking for—he whispered to the trees, whispered to the
ground, touched them, as a blind man caresses a page of
Braille, pulling meaning through his fingers.
Milkman rubbed the back of his head against the bark.
This was what Guitar had missed about the South—the
woods, hunters, killing. But something had maimed him,
scarred him like Reverend Cooper’s knot, like Saul’s
missing teeth, and like his own father. He felt a sudden rush
of affection for them all, and out there under the sweet gumtree, within the sound of men tracking a bobcat, he thought
he understood Guitar now. Really understood him.
Down either side of his thighs he felt the sweet gum’s
surface roots cradling him like the rough but maternal
hands of a grandfather. Feeling both tense and relaxed, he
sank his fingers into the grass. He tried to listen with his
fingertips, to hear what, if anything, the earth had to say,
and it told him quickly that someone was standing behind
him and he had just enough time to raise one hand to his
neck and catch the wire that fastened around his throat. It
cut like a razor into his fingers, tore into the skin so deeply
he had to let go. The wire pressed into his neck then and
took his breath. He thought he heard himself gurgling and
saw a burst of many-colored lights dancing before his eyes.
When the music followed the colored lights, he knew he had
just drawn the last sweet air left for him in the world. Exactly
the way he’d heard it would be, his life flashed before him,
but it consisted of only one image: Hagar bending over him
in perfect love, in the most intimate sexual gesture
imaginable. In the midst of that picture he heard the voice of
the someone holding the wire say, “Your Day has come,”
and it filled him with such sadness to be dying, leaving this
world at the fingertips of his friend, that he relaxed and in
the instant it took to surrender to the overwhelming
melancholy he felt the cords of his struggling neck muscles
relax too and there was a piece of a second in which the
wire left him room enough to gasp, to take another breath.
But it was a living breath this time, not a dying one. Hagar,the lights, the music, disappeared, and Milkman grabbed
the Winchester at his side, cocked it, and pulled the trigger,
shooting into the trees in front of him. The blast startled
Guitar, and the wire slipped again. Guitar pulled it back, but
Milkman knew his friend would need both hands to keep it
that way. He turned the shotgun backward as far as he
could and managed awkwardly, to pull the trigger again,
hitting only branches and dirt. He was wondering if there
was another blast in the gun when he heard right up close
the wild, wonderful sound of three baying dogs who he
knew had treed a bobcat. The wire dropped and he heard
Guitar breaking into a fast run through the trees. Milkman
stood up and grabbed his flashlight, pointing it in the
direction of the sound of running feet. He saw nothing but
branches resettling themselves. Rubbing his neck, he
moved toward the sound of the dogs. Guitar did not have a
gun, otherwise he would have used it, so Milkman felt
secure heading for the dogs with the gun in his hand even
though it had no more shot. He didn’t miss; his sense of
direction was accurate and he came upon Calvin, Small
Boy, Luther, and Omar crouching on the ground a few feet
away from the dogs and the glistening night eyes of a
bobcat in a tree.
The dogs were trying their best to get up into the tree,
and the men were considering whether to shoot the bobcat
down, shoot a limb and make him jump down and fight the
dogs, or what. They decided to try and kill the cat where he
lay. Omar stood up and took his lamp over to the left. Thecat crept a little ways out, following the light. Then Small
Boy took aim and put a bullet just under the left foreleg and
the bobcat dropped through the branches into the jaws of
Becky and her companions.
There was a lot of life in the cat; he fought well until Calvin
hollered the dogs away and shot it again, and once more,
and then it was still.
They held the lamps over the carcass and groaned with
pleasure at the size, the ferocity, the stillness of it. All four
got down on their knees, pulling rope and knives, cutting a
branch the width of a wrist, tying it and binding it for the long
walk back.
They were so pleased with themselves it was some time
before anybody remembered to ask Milkman what he was
shooting at back there. Milkman hoisted the stake he was
carrying a little higher and said, “I dropped the gun. I tripped
and it went off. Then when I picked it up it went off again.”
They burst into laughter. “Tripped? What’d you have the
safety off for? Was you scared?”
“Scared to death,” said Milkman. “Scared to death.”
They hooted and laughed all the way back to the car,
teasing Milkman, egging him on to tell more about how
scared he was. And he told them. Laughing too, hard, loud,
and long. Really laughing, and he found himself exhilaratedby simply walking the earth. Walking it like he belonged on
it; like his legs were stalks, tree trunks, a part of his body
that extended down down down into the rock and soil, and
were comfortable there—on the earth and on the place
where he walked. And he did not limp.
They met dawn in King Walker’s gas station for a rehash
of the night they had spent. Milkman was the butt of their
humor, but it was good-humored humor, quite unlike the
laughter the trip had begun with. “Lucky to be alive. Cat
wasn’t the problem; this here nigger was the problem.
Blastin away at us while we got a mean cat gettin ready to
chew us and the dogs up both. Shootin all through the
woods. Could have blown his own head off. Don’t you city
boys know how to handle yourself?”
“You country niggers got it all over us,” Milkman
answered.
Omar and Small Boy slapped him on the shoulders.
Calvin hollered to Luther, “Go get Vernell. Tell her to get
breakfast ready. Soon’s we skin this cat, we comin in there
with a appetite and she better be ready to meet it!”
Milkman went with them to the back of the station, where,
on a small cemented area covered by a corrugated tin roof,
the dead bobcat lay. Milkman’s neck had swollen so it was
difficult for him to lower his chin without pain.Omar sliced through the rope that bound the bobcat’s
feet. He and Calvin turned it over on its back. The legs fell
open. Such thin delicate ankles.
“Every body wants a black man’s life.”
Calvin held the forefeet open and up while Omar pierced
the curling hair at the point where the sternum lay. Then he
sliced all the way down to the genitals. His knife pointed
upward for a cleaner, neater incision.
“Not his dead life; I mean his living life.”
When he reached the genitals he cut them off, but left the
scrotum intact.
“It’s the condition our condition is in.”
Omar cut around the legs and the neck. Then he pulled
the hide off.
“What good is a man’s life if he can’t even choose what
to die for?”
The transparent underskin tore like gossamer under his
fingers.
“Everybody wants the life of a black man.”
Now Small Boy knelt down and slit the flesh from thescrotum to the jaw.
“Fair is one more thing I’ve given up.”
Luther came back and, while the others rested, carved
out the rectal tube with the deft motions of a man coring an
apple.
“I hope I never have to ask myself that question.”
Luther reached into the paunch and lifted the entrails. He
dug under the rib cage to the diaphragm and carefully cut
around it until it was free.
“It
 is
 about love. What else but love? Can’t I love what I
criticize?”
Then he grabbed the windpipe and the gullet, eased
them back, and severed them with one stroke of his little
knife.
“It is about love. What else?”
They turned to Milkman. “You want the heart?” they asked
him. Quickly, before any thought could paralyze him,
Milkman plunged both hands into the rib cage. “Don’t get
the lungs, now. Get the heart.”
“What else?”He found it and pulled. The heart fell away from the chest
as easily as yolk slips out of its shell.
“What else? What else? What else?”
Now Luther went back into the stomach cavity and
yanked the entrails out altogether. They sucked up like a
vacuum through the hole that was made at the rectum. He
slipped the entrails into a paper bag while the others began
cleaning up, hosing down, salting, packing, straightening,
and then they turned the cat over to let the blood drain down
on its own hide.
“What are you going to do with it?” asked Milkman.
“Eat him!”
A peacock soared away and lit on the hood of a blue
Buick.
Milkman looked at the bobcat’s head. The tongue lay in
its mouth as harmless as a sandwich. Only the eyes held
the menace of the night.
Hungry as he was, he couldn’t eat much of Vernell’s
breakfast, so he pushed the scrambled eggs, hominy, fried
apples around in the plate, gulped coffee and talked a lot.
And, somehow, he had to get around to the purpose of his
visit to Shalimar.“You know, my grandfather came from somewhere near
here. My grandmother too.”
“Did? From around here? What’s their name?”
“I don’t know her maiden name, but her first name was
Sing. Any of you ever know anybody with a name like that?”
They shook their heads. “Sing? No. Never heard of
nobody name that.”
“I had an aunt live down this way too. Name of Pilate.
Pilate Dead. Ever hear of her?”
“Ha! Sound like a newspaper headline: Pilot Dead. She
do any flying?”
“No.
 P-i-l-a-t-e,
 Pilate.”
“P-i-l-a-t-e.
 That spell
 Pie-late,”
 Small Boy said.
“Naw, nigger. Not no
 Pie-late.
 Pilate like in the Bible,
dummy.”
“He don’t read the Bible.”
“He don’t read nothin.”
“He can’t read nothin.”They teased Small Boy until Vernell interrupted them.
“You all hush. You say Sing?” she asked Milkman.
“Yeah. Sing.”
“I believe that was the name of a girl my gran used to play
with. I remember the name cause it sounded so pretty.
Gran used to talk about her all the time. Seem like her folks
didn’t like her to play with the colored children from over this
way, so her and my gran used to sneak off and go fishin
and berry-pickin. You know what I mean? She’d have to
meet her in secret.” Vernell eyed Milkman carefully. “This
Sing girl was light-skinned, with straight black hair.”
“That’s her!” Milkman said. “She was mixed or Indian,
one.”
Vernell nodded. “Indian. One of old Heddy’s children.
Heddy was all right, but she didn’t like her girl playin with
coloreds. She was a Byrd.”
“A what?”
“A Byrd. Belonged to the Byrd family over by the ridge.
Near Solomon’s Leap.”
“Oh, yeah?” said one of the men. “One of Susan Byrd’s
people?”
“That’s right. One of them. They never was too crazy ‘boutcolored folks. Susan either.”
“Do they still live there?” asked Milkman.
“Susan do. Right behind the ridge. Only house back in
there with a brick front. She by herself now. All the others
moved out so they could pass.”
“Can I walk it?” he asked.
“Most folks could, I reckon,” said Omar. “But after last
night I don’t recommend it for you.” He laughed.
“Can you drive a car through?”
“Part of the way you can. But the road is narrow and
messy back up in there,” said Vernell. “Horse, maybe, but
not no car.”
“I’ll make it. Might take me a week, but I’ll make it,” said
Milkman.
“Just don’t carry no guns”—Calvin cooled his coffee in
his saucer—“and you’ll be all right.” They all laughed again.
Milkman thought about that. Guitar was out there
someplace, and since he seemed to know everything
Milkman was doing or getting ready to do, he’d also know
he was going out to some ridge. He touched his swollen
neck. He didn’t want to go anywhere alone without a gun.“You ought to have a rest before you go trottin off
anywhere,” Omar said, looking at him. “There’s a nice lady
up the road a ways. She’d be proud to take you in.” The
look in his eyes was unmistakable. “Pretty woman too. Real
pretty.” Vernell grunted and Milkman smiled. Hope she’s
got a gun, he thought.
She didn’t, but she had indoor plumbing and her smile
was just like her name, Sweet, as she nodded her head to
Milkman’s query about whether he could take a bath. The
tub was the newest feature in the tiny shotgun house and
Milkman sank gratefully into the steaming water. Sweet
brought him soap and a boar’s-bristle brush and knelt to
bathe him. What she did for his sore feet, his cut face, his
back, his neck, his thighs, and the palms of his hands was
so delicious he couldn’t imagine that the lovemaking to
follow would be anything but anticlimactic. If this bath and
this woman, he thought, are all that come out of this trip, I
will rest easy and do my duty to God, country, and the
Brotherhood of Elks for the rest of my life. I will walk hot
coals with a quart of kerosene in my hand for this. I will walk
every railroad tie from here to Cheyenne and back for this.
But when the lovemaking came, he decided he would
crawl.
Afterward he offered to bathe her. She said he couldn’t
because the tank was small and there wasn’t enough water
for another hot bath.“Then let me give you a cool one,” he said. He soaped
and rubbed her until her skin squeaked and glistened like
onyx. She put salve on his face. He washed her hair. She
sprinkled talcum on his feet. He straddled her behind and
massaged her back. She put witch hazel on his swollen
neck. He made up the bed. She gave him gumbo to eat. He
washed the dishes. She washed his clothes and hung them
out to dry. He scoured her tub. She ironed his shirt and
pants. He gave her fifty dollars. She kissed his mouth. He
touched her face. She said please come back. He said I’ll
see you tonight.Chapter 12
At four o’clock he knocked on the door of the only house
back of the ridge with a brick front. Fresh and shining in the
army fatigues Sweet had washed and pressed, he had
tramped along feeling ready for anything. But he didn’t think
Guitar would jump him in the daytime on a winding path
(which they called a road) that cut through hilly land that was
nevertheless tilled and had a smattering of houses and
people. If he did confront him (with anything other than a
gun) Milkman was sure he could take him, but it would be
best to get back before nightfall. He didn’t know what was
on Guitar’s mind, but he knew it had something to do with
the gold. If he knows I’m here and where I have been and
what I did in each place, then he must know that I’m trying to
get it, doing just what I said I would do. Why would he try to
kill me before I got it or even found out what happened to it?
Most of it was a total mystery to him, but the part that was
clear was enough to keep him alert and jittery all the way.
The Byrd house sat on a neat lawn separated by a white
picket fence from the field grass on either side of the
property. A child’s swing dangled from a cedar tree; four
little steps painted blue led up to the porch, and from the
window, between fluttering curtains, came the smell of
gingerbread baking.A woman who looked to be about his mother’s age
answered the door.
“Miss Byrd?” Milkman asked her.
“Yes?”
“How are you? My name is, uh, Macon, and I’m visiting
here for a few days. I’m from Michigan and I think some of
my people lived here a long time ago. I was hoping you’d
be able to help me.”
“Help you what?” She sounded arch and Milkman had the
distinct impression that this lady did not like the color of his
skin.
“Find them. I mean find out about them. We’re all split up,
my family, and some folks in town thought you might know
some of them.”
“Who’s that, Susan?” Another woman’s voice came from
behind her.
“Somebody to see
 me,
 Grace.”
“Well, why don’t you ask him in? Don’t make him state
his business on the steps.”
Miss Byrd sighed. “Please come in, Mr. Macon.”Milkman followed her into a pleasant living room full up
with sunshine. “Excuse me,” she said. “I didn’t mean to be
rude. Please have a seat.” She motioned to a gray velvet
wing-back chair. A woman in a two-piece print dress came
into the room, clutching a paper napkin in her hand and
chewing on something.
“Who’d you say?” She addressed her question to Miss
Byrd, but ran inquisitive eyes over Milkman.
Miss Byrd held out a hand. “This is a friend of mine—
Miss Long. Grace Long—Mr….”
“How do you do?” Grace held out her hand to him.
“Fine, thank you.”
“Mr. Macon, is it?”
“Yes.”
“Susan, perhaps Mr. Macon would like some
refreshment.” Miss Long smiled and sat on the sofa facing
the gray chair.
“Well, he just stepped foot in the door, Grace. Give me
time.” Miss Byrd turned to Milkman. “Would you like a cup
of coffee or some tea?”
“Sure. Thanks.”“Which one?”
“Coffee’s all right.”
“You’ve got butter cookies, Susan. Give him some of
those butter cookies.”
Miss Byrd gave her friend a tired frown. “I’ll just be a
minute,” she said to Milkman, and left the room.
“Yes, well. Did I hear you say you were visiting in these
parts? We don’t see too many visitors.” Grace crossed her
ankles. Like Susan Byrd, she wore black laced shoes and
cotton stockings. As she made herself comfortable, she
inched her dress up a little.
“Yes, visiting.”
“You in the service?”
“Ma’am? Oh, no. I was hunting last night. Some friends
lent me these.” He smoothed the seam Sweet had made in
the fatigues.
“Hunting? Oh, Lord, don’t tell me you’re one of them. I
can’t stand those hunting people. They make me sick,
always prowling round other people’s property. Day and
night they’re shooting up the world. I tell my students—I’m a
schoolteacher, you know, I teach over at the normal school.
Have you seen it yet?”Have you seen it yet?”
“No, not yet.”
“Well, there’s nothing to see, really. Just a school, like
any other. But you’re welcome to stop by. We’d be pleased
to have you. Where you from again?”
“Michigan.”
“I thought so. Susan!” She turned around. “He’s from up
North.” Then back to Milkman: “Where are you staying?”
“Well, nowhere yet. I just met a few people in town and…”
Susan Byrd came in with a tray of coffee cups and a
plate of wide pale cookies.
“He’s from Michigan,” said Grace.
“I heard him. How do you take your coffee?”
“Black.”
“Black? No cream or sugar at all?” asked Grace. “Wish I
could do that; maybe I could get back into a twelve. But it’s
never going to happen now.” She pressed one hand on her
hip and smiled at Milkman.
“What did you want to see me about?” Susan Byrd
placed a mild but clear stress on the word “me.”“I’m trying to locate anybody who might have known my
grandmother. Her name was Sing.”
Grace clapped her hands to her mouth and gave a little
squeal. “Relatives! You all are relatives!” Milkman put his
cup down. “Well, I’ll be!” Grace’s eyes were lit and dancing.
“You’ve come to the right place,” said Susan, “but I doubt
if I can help you any.”
“What are you talking about, Susan? Your mother was
named Sing, wasn’t she?”
“No, she wasn’t, Grace, and if you let me finish a
sentence you might learn something you don’t know too.”
“I thought you said—”
“My mother’s name was Mary.
 M-a-r-y,
 Mary.”
“Well, excuse
 me.
”
Susan turned to Milkman. “My father, Crowell Byrd, had a
sister named Sing.”
“That must be her! My grandmother! Sing. Did she marry
a man named—”
“I knew there was somebody in your family named Sing!”“She didn’t marry anybody that I know of.” Susan
interrupted them both.
“Oh, this is really something. A stranger walks right into
your house and he’s your own …what? Cousin? I hate to
say it, but this is a small world. Isn’t it? You have got to visit
my class, Mr. Macon.”
Milkman joined Susan Byrd in ignoring Grace Long.
“Where did she live?” he asked her.
“The last time my father saw her, she was on a wagon
headed for Massachusetts to a private school up there. A
Quaker school.”
“Your people Quakers? You never told me that. See, Mr.
Macon, what your friends hide from you? I bet she’d hide
you too.”
“And she never married?” Milkman couldn’t take the time
to acknowledge Grace’s attentions.
“Not anybody we heard of. After she went to that Quaker
school they lost track of her. I believe they tried to locate
her, mostly because my grandmother—her name was
Heddy—she was so torn up about it. I always believed the
same thing my father believed: that she didn’t want to be
found after she left that school.”
“You know darn well she didn’t,” said Grace. “Sheprobably started passing like the rest of ’em, that’s what.”
She leaned toward Milkman. “There used to be a lot of that.
A Not so much nowadays, but there used to be a lot of ’em
did it—if they could.” She shot a glance at Susan. “Like
your cousins, Susan. They’re passing now. Lilah, John. I
know John is, and he knows I know he is.”
“Everybody knows that, Grace.”
“Mr. Macon doesn’t know it. I saw John on the street in
Mayville—”
“Mr. Macon doesn’t need to know it. He’s not even
interested.”
“How do you know he’s not?”
“Because he said the woman he’s looking for was his
grandmother, and if she’s his grandmother she’d be too
dark to…” Susan Byrd hesitated. “Well, too dark to pass.
Wouldn’t she?” She flushed a little.
Milkman ignored the question. “And you say she lived in
Massachusetts, right?”
“Yes. Boston.”
“I see.” It looked like a dead end, so he decided to follow
another line. “Did you ever know or hear of a woman
around here named Pilate?”“Pilate. No. Never. Have you, Grace?”
Grace shook her head. “No, and I’ve been here most of
my life.”
“I’ve been here
 all
 of mine,” said Susan. “Both my
parents were born here and so was I. Never been farther
away than St. Phillips County. I have people in South
Carolina, but I’ve never even been to visit them.”
“That’s because they’re passing too. Just like John. You
couldn’t visit them if you wanted to.” Grace leaned over the
plate of cookies and selected one.
“They’re not the only family I have left.” Susan was
indignant.
“I hope not. It’s a sad thing, Mr. Macon, when you’re left
without any people to claim you. I keep up with my family.
I’m not married, you know, not yet anyway, but my family is
very
 close.” She gave him a meaningful look. Milkman
turned his wrist and looked down to see what time it was.
“Oh, look at that.” Grace pointed to his hand. “What a
good-looking watch. May I see it?” Milkman stood up to
hand it to her and remained standing. “Look, Susan, it
doesn’t have a single number on it. Just dots. Now, how
can anybody figure out what time it is from those dots?”Susan rose too. “You ever been down here before, Mr.
Macon?”
“No. This is my first visit.”
“Well, I hope it won’t be your last. How long will you be
here?”
“Oh, I think I’ll get on back tonight or tomorrow at the
latest.” He looked out the window. The sun was dropping.
“That soon?” asked Grace. “Why don’t you give him
something to take with him, Susan? Would you like to take
some butter cookies with you, Mr. Macon?”
“No, thank you.”
“You’ll be happy to have them later.” The woman was
wearing him down. He smiled, though, and said, “If you
like.”
“I’ll fix a little package for you. Okay, Susan?” She fled
from the room.
Susan managed a small smile. “Wish you could stay and
visit with us awhile.” Her words were as mechanical as her
smile.
“So do I,” he said, “but, well, maybe I’ll be back.”“That’d be nice. Sorry I couldn’t be of any help to you.”
“You have been.”
“Have I?”
“Oh, sure. You have to know what’s wrong before you can
find what’s right.”
She smiled a genuine smile then. “It’s important to you, is
it, to find your people?”
Milkman thought about it. “No. Not really. I was just
passing through, and it was just—just an idea. It’s not
important.”
Grace returned with a little parcel wrapped in white paper
napkins. “Here you are,” she said. “You’ll appreciate this
later on.”
“Thank you. Thank you both.”
“Nice meeting you.”
“And you.”
He left the house feeling tired and off center. I’ll spend
one more night here and then leave, he thought. The car
should be fixed by now. There’s nothing here to know, no
gold or any traces of it. Pilate lived in Virginia, but not in thispart of the state. Nobody at all has heard of her. And the
Sing that lived here went to Boston, not Danville,
Pennsylvania, and passed for white. His grandmother
would have been “too dark to pass.” She had actually
blushed. As though she’d discovered something shameful
about him. He was both angry and amused and wondered
what Omar and Sweet and Vernell thought of Miss Susan
Byrd.
He was curious about these people. He didn’t feel close
to them, but he did feel connected, as though there was
some cord or pulse or information they shared. Back home
he had never felt that way, as though he belonged to
anyplace or anybody. He’d always considered himself the
outsider in his family, only vaguely involved with his friends,
and except for Guitar, there was no one whose opinion of
himself he cared about. Once, long ago, he had cared what
Pilate and Hagar thought of him, but having conquered
Hagar and having disregarded Pilate enough to steal from
her, all that was gone. But there was something he felt now
—here in Shalimar, and earlier in Danville—that reminded
him of how he used to feel in Pilate’s house. Sitting in
Susan Byrd’s living room, lying with Sweet, eating with
those men at Vernell’s table, he didn’t have to get over, to
turn on, or up, or even out.
And there was something more. It wasn’t true what he’d
said to Susan Byrd: that it wasn’t important to find his
people. Ever since Danville, his interest in his own people,not just the ones he met, had been growing. Macon Dead,
also known as Jake somebody. Sing. Who were they, and
what were they like? The man who sat for five nights on a
fence with a gun, waiting. Who named his baby girl Pilate,
who tore a farm out of a wilderness. The man who ate
pecans on a wagon going North. Did he have brothers or
sisters whom he left behind? Who was his mother, his
father? And his wife. Was she the Boston Sing? If so, what
was she doing on a wagon? Why would she go off to a
northern private school on a wagon? Not a carriage or a
train, but a wagon—full of ex-slaves. Maybe she never got
to Boston. Maybe she didn’t pass. She could have changed
her mind about school and run off with the boy she ate
pecans with. And whoever she was, why did she want her
husband to keep that awful name? To wipe out the past?
What past? Slavery? She was never a slave.
 His
 slave
past? And why didn’t his own father, and Pilate, know any
of their own relatives? Wasn’t there any family to notify
when the father died? Macon didn’t ever try to get to
Virginia. Pilate headed straight for it.
Milkman opened the parcel Grace had fixed for him and
took out a cookie. A little piece of paper fluttered to the
ground. He picked it up and read: “Grace Long 40 Route 2
three houses down from the Normal School.” He smiled.
That’s why it took her so long to wrap up four cookies. He
bit into one of them and sauntered along, crumpling the
napkins and Grace’s invitation into a wad. The questions
about his family still knocked around in his head like billiardballs. If his grandfather, this Jake, was born in the same
place his wife was, in Shalimar, why did he tell the Yankee
he was born in Macon, thereby providing him with the raw
material for the misnaming? And if he and his wife were
born in the same place, why did Pilate and his father and
Circe all say they “met” on that wagon? And why did the
ghost tell Pilate to sing? Milkman chuckled to himself. That
wasn’t what he was telling her at all; maybe the ghost was
just repeating his wife’s name, Sing, and Pilate didn’t know
it because she never knew her mother’s name. After she
died Macon Dead wouldn’t let anybody say it aloud. That
was funny. He wouldn’t speak it after she died, and after he
died that’s all he ever said—her name.
Jesus! Here he was walking around in the middle of the
twentieth century trying to explain what a ghost had done.
But why not? he thought. One fact was certain: Pilate did
not have a navel. Since that was true, anything could be,
and why not ghosts as well?
He was near the road leading to the town now, and it was
getting dark. He lifted his wrist to look at his watch and
remembered that Grace had not given it back to him.
“Damn,” he murmured aloud. “I’m losing everything.” He
stood still, trying to make up his mind whether to go back
for it now or later. If he went now, he’d be forced to return in
deep darkness. Totally defenseless before a hit from
Guitar. But it would be a real bother to have to come all the
way back here—where no car could make it—tomorrowwhen he was going to leave. But Guitar might be—
“I can’t let him direct and determine what I do, where I go
or when. If I do that now I’ll do it all my life and he’ll run me
off the earth.”
He didn’t know what to do, but decided finally that a
watch was not worth worrying about. All it could do was tell
him the time of day and he really wasn’t interested. Wiping
cookie crumbs from his mustache, he turned into the main
road, and there, outlined in cobalt blue, stood Guitar.
Leaned, rather, against a persimmon tree. Milkman
stopped, surprised at the calm, steady beat of his heart—
the complete absence of fear. But then, Guitar was
cleaning his fingernails with a harmless match stick. Any
weapon he had would have to be hidden in his denim
jacket or pants.
They looked at each other for a minute. No, less. Just
long enough for the heart of each man to adjust its throb to
the downbeat of the other. Guitar spoke first.
“My man.”
Milkman ignored the greeting. “Why, Guitar? Just tell me
why.”
“You took the gold.”
“What gold? There wasn’t any gold.”“You took the gold.”
“The cave was empty, man. I got down on my stomach
and looked in that pit. I put my hands—”
“You took the gold.”
“You’re crazy, Guitar.”
“Angry. Never crazy.”
“There wasn’t any gold!” Milkman tried hard not to shout.
“I saw you, motherfucker.”
“Saw me what?”
“Take the gold.”
“Where?”
“In Danville.”
“You saw me with gold in Danville?”
“I saw you with gold in Danville.”
“You’ve got to be kidding. What was I doing with it?”
“Shipping it.”“Shipping it?”
“Yeah. Why the game, man? You just greedy, like your
old man? Or what?” Guitar’s eyes rested on the last butter
cookie in Milkman’s hand. He frowned and began to
breathe through his lips.
“Guitar, I didn’t ship no gold. There wasn’t any gold to
ship. You couldn’t have seen me.”
“I saw you, baby. I was in the station.”
“What fuckin station?”
“The freight station in Danville.”
Milkman remembered then, going to look for Reverend
Cooper, looking all over for him. Then going into the station
house to see if he’d gone, and there helping a man lift a
huge crate onto the weighing platform. He started to laugh.
“Oh, shit. Guitar, that wasn’t no gold. I was just helping that
man lift a crate. He asked me to help him. Help him lift a big
old crate. I did and then I split.”
Guitar looked at the cookie again, then back into
Milkman’s eyes. Nothing changed in his face. Milkman
knew it sounded lame. It was the truth, but it sounded like a
lie. A weak lie too. He also knew that in all his life, Guitar
had never seen Milkman give anybody a hand, especially astranger; he also knew that they’d even discussed it,
starting with Milkman’s not coming to his mother’s rescue in
a dream he had. Guitar had accused him of selfishness
and indifference; told him he wasn’t serious, and didn’t
have any fellow feeling—none whatsoever. Now he was
standing there saying that he willingly, spontaneously, had
helped an old white man lift a huge, heavy crate. But it was
true. It was true. And he’d prove it.
“Guitar, why am I here? If I was shipping gold back home,
why am I here dressed like this? Would I be roaming
around in the country like a fool with a crate of gold off
somewhere? Would I? What the fuck would I do that for and
then come here?”
“Maybe you shipped the gold
 here,
 you jive-ass.”
“What the fuck are you talking about?”
“I looked! I saw it! You hear me? I drove down there,
followed you there, because I had a funny feeling that you
were pulling a fast one. I wasn’t sure, but I felt it. If I was
wrong, I’d help you get it. But I wasn’t wrong. I got into
Danville that afternoon. I drove right past the freight depot
and there you were in your little beige suit. I parked and
followed you into the station. When I got there I saw you
shipping it. Giving it to the man. I waited until you left, and I
went back in and asked the cracker if my friend”—he
slurred the word—“had shipped a crate to Michigan. Theman said no. Just one crate on the load, he said. Just one
crate. And when I asked him where it was going, all he
could remember was Virginia.” Guitar smiled. “The bus you
caught wasn’t headed for Michigan. It was headed for
Virginia. And here you are.”
Milkman felt whipped. There was nothing to do but let it
play.
“Was my name on the crate?”
“I didn’t look.”
“Would I send a crate of gold to Virginia—
gold
, man.”
“You might. You did.”
“Is that why you tried to kill me?”
“Yes.”
“Because I ripped you off?”
“Because you ripped us off! You are fuckin with our
work!”
“You’re wrong. Dead wrong.”
“The ‘dead’ part is you.”
Milkman looked down at the cookie in his hand. It lookedMilkman looked down at the cookie in his hand. It looked
foolish and he started to throw it away, but changed his
mind. “So my Day has come?”
“Your Day has come, but on
 my
 schedule. And believe it:
I will run you as long as there is ground. Your name is
Macon, but you ain’t dead yet.”
“Tell me something. When you saw me in the station, with
the crate, why did you back off and hide? Why didn’t you
just walk up to me? It could have been settled there.”
“I told you. I had this funny funny feeling.”
“That I was going to cut you out?”
“Cut us out. Yes.”
“And you believe I did?”
“Yes.”
“Back there in the woods you were angry.”
“Yes.”
“Now you’re going to wait till the gold comes.”
“Yes.”
“And I pick it up.”“You won’t be able to pick it up.”
“Do me a favor. When it gets here. Check it first to see if
there’s gold in it.”
“First?”
“Or last. But before you haul it all the way back home.”
“Don’t worry yourself about it.”
“One more thing. Why the message? Why’d you warn me
with a message at the store?”
“You’re my friend. It’s the least I could do for a friend.”
“My man. I want to thank you.”
“You’re welcome, baby.”
Milkman slipped into Sweet’s bed and slept the night in
her perfect arms. It was a warm dreamy sleep all about
flying, about sailing high over the earth. But not with arms
stretched out like airplane wings, nor shot forward like
Superman in a horizontal dive, but floating, cruising, in the
relaxed position of a man lying on a couch reading a
newspaper. Part of his flight was over the dark sea, but it
didn’t frighten him because he knew he could not fall. He
was alone in the sky, but somebody was applauding him,
watching him and applauding. He couldn’t see who it was.When he awoke the next morning and set about seeing
to the repair of his car, he couldn’t shake the dream, and
didn’t really want to. In Solomon’s store he found Omar and
Solomon shaking sacks of okra into peck baskets and he
still felt the sense of lightness and power that flying had
given him.
“Got a belt for your car,” said Omar. “Ain’t new, but it
ought to fit.”
“Hey, that’s good. Thanks, Omar.”
“You leavin us right away?”
“Yeah, I have to get on back.”
“You see that Byrd woman all right?”
“Yeah, I saw her.”
“She help you any?” Omar wiped the okra fuzz from his
hands onto his trousers.
“No. Not much.”
“Well, King Walker say he be down this morning and put
the belt on. You probably ought to get a good checkup on
that car once you get on the road.”
“I plan to.”“Sweet give you any breakfast?” asked Solomon.
“She tried, but I wanted to get over here early to see
about the car.”
“What about a cup a coffee; there’s a full pot in back.”
“No, thanks. I think I’ll walk around a little till he comes.”
It was six-thirty in the morning and the town was bustling
as though it were high noon. Life and business began early
in the South so the coolest part of the day could be taken
advantage of. People had already eaten, women had
already washed clothes and were spreading them on
bushes, and in a few days, when the school in the next town
opened, children at this hour would already be walking,
running over the roads and fields to class. Now they were
sauntering about, doing chores, teasing cats, throwing
bread to stray chickens, and some of them were playing
their endless round games. Milkman could hear them
singing and wandered off toward them and the huge cedar
that reared up over their heads. Again their sweet voices
reminded him of the gap in his own childhood, as he leaned
against the cedar to watch them. The boy in the middle of
the circle (it seemed always to be a boy) spun around with
his eyes closed and his arm stretched out, pointing. Round
and round he went until the song ended with a shout and he
stopped, his finger pointing at a child Milkman could not
see. Then they all dropped to their knees and he wassee. Then they all dropped to their knees and he was
surprised to hear them begin another song at this point,
one he had heard off and on all his life. That old blues song
Pilate sang all the time: “O Sugarman don’t leave me here,”
except the children sang, “Solomon don’t leave me here.”
Milkman smiled, remembering Pilate. Hundreds of miles
away, he was homesick for her, for her house, for the very
people he had been hell-bent to leave. His mother’s quiet,
crooked, apologetic smile. Her hopeless helplessness in
the kitchen. The best years of her life, from age twenty to
forty, had been celibate, and aside from the consummation
that began his own life, the rest of her life had been the
same. He hadn’t thought much of it when she’d told him, but
now it seemed to him that such sexual deprivation would
affect her, hurt her in precisely the way it would affect and
hurt him. If it were possible for somebody to force him to
live that way, to tell him, “You may walk and live among
women, you may even lust after them, but you will not make
love for the next twenty years,” how would he feel? What
would he do? Would he continue as he was? And suppose
he were married and his wife refused him for fifteen years.
His mother had been able to live through that by a long
nursing of her son, some occasional visits to a graveyard.
What might she have been like had her husband loved her?
And his father. An old man now, who acquired things and
used people to acquire more things. As the son of Macon
Dead the first, he paid homage to his own father’s life and
death by loving what that father had loved: property, goodsolid property, the bountifulness of life. He loved these
things to excess because he loved his father to excess.
Owning, building, acquiring–that was his life, his future, his
present, and all the history he knew. That he distorted life,
bent it, for the sake of gain, was a measure of his loss at
his father’s death.
As Milkman watched the children, he began to feel
uncomfortable. Hating his parents, his sisters, seemed silly
now. And the skim of shame that he had rinsed away in the
bathwater after having stolen from Pilate returned. But now
it was as thick and as tight as a caul. How could he have
broken into that house–the only one he knew that achieved
comfort without one article of comfort in it. No soft worn-
down chair, not a cushion or a pillow. No light switch, no
water running free and clear after a turn of a tap handle. No
napkins, no tablecloth. No fluted plates or flowered cups, no
circle of blue flame burning in a stove eye. But peace was
there, energy, singing, and now his own remembrances.
His mind turned to Hagar and how he had treated her at
the end. Why did he never sit her down and talk to her?
Honestly. And what ugly thing was it he said to her the last
time she tried to kill him? And God, how hollow her eyes
had looked. He was never frightened of her; he never
actually believed that she would succeed in killing him, or
that she really wanted to. Her weapons, the complete lack
of cunning or intelligence even of conviction, in her attacks
were enough to drain away any fear. Oh, she could haveaccidentally hurt him, but he could have stopped her in any
number of ways. But he hadn’t wanted to. He had used her
—her love, her craziness—and most of all he had used her
skulking, bitter vengeance. It made him a star, a celebrity in
the Blood Bank; it told men and other women that he was
one bad dude, that he had the power to drive a woman out
of her mind, to destroy her, and not because she hated him,
or because he had done some unforgivable thing to her, but
because he had fucked her and she was driven wild by the
absence of his magnificent joint. His hog’s gut, Lena had
called it. Even the last time, he used her. Used her
imminent arrival and feeble attempt at murder as an
exercise of his will against hers—an ultimatum to the
universe. “Die, Hagar, die.” Either this bitch dies or I do.
And she stood there like a puppet strung up by a puppet
master who had gone off to some other hobby.
O Solomon don’t leave me here.
The children were starting the round again. Milkman
rubbed the back of his neck. Suddenly he was tired,
although the morning was still new. He pushed himself
away from the cedar and sank to his haunches.
Jay the only son of Solomon
Come booba yalle, come…Everybody in this town is named Solomon, he thought
wearily. Solomon’s General Store, Luther Solomon (no
relation), Solomon’s Leap, and now the children were
singing
 “Solomon
 don’t leave me” instead of
 “Sugarman.”
Even the name of the town sounded like Solomon:
Shalimar, which Mr. Solomon and everybody else
pronounced
 Shalleemone.
Milkman’s scalp began to tingle. Jay the only son of
Solomon? Was that Jake the only son of Solomon?
 Jake.
He strained to hear the children. That was one of the
people he was looking for. A man named Jake who lived in
Shalimar, as did his wife, Sing.
He sat up and waited for the children to begin the verse
again. “Come booba yalle, come booba tambee,” it
sounded like, and didn’t make sense. But another line
—“Black lady fell down on the ground”—was clear enough.
There was another string of nonsense words, then “Threw
her body all around.” Now the child in the center began
whirling, spinning to lyrics sung in a different, faster tempo:
“Solomon ’n’ Reiner Belali Shalut…”
Solomon again, and Reiner? Ryna? Why did the second
name sound so familiar? Solomon and Ryna. The woods.
The hunt. Solomon’s Leap and Ryna’s Gulch, places they
went to or passed by that night they shot the bobcat. The
gulch was where he heard that noise that sounded like a
woman crying, which Calvin said came from Ryna’s Gulch,that there was an echo there that folks said was “a woman
name Ryna” crying. You could hear her when the wind was
right.
But what was the rest: Belali…Shalut…Yaruba? If
Solomon and Ryna were names of people, the others might
be also. The verse ended in another clear line. “Twenty-one
children, the last one
 Jake!”
 And it was at the shout of
 Jake
(who was also, apparently, “the only son of Solomon”) that
the twirling boy stopped. Now Milkman understood that if
the child’s finger pointed at nobody, missed, they started up
again. But if it pointed directly to another child, that was
when they fell to their knees and sang Pilate’s song.
Milkman took out his wallet and pulled from it his airplane
ticket stub, but he had no pencil to write with, and his pen
was in his suit. He would just have to listen and memorize it.
He closed his eyes and concentrated while the children,
inexhaustible in their willingness to repeat a rhythmic,
rhyming action game, performed the round over and over
again. And Milkman memorized all of what they sang.
Jake the only son of Solomon
Come booba yalle, come booba tambee
Whirled about and touched the sunCome konka yalle, come konka tambee
Left that baby in a white man’s house
Come booba yalle, come booba tambee
Heddy took him to a red man’s house
Come konka yalle, come konka tambee
Black lady fell down on the ground
Come booba yalle booba tambee
Threw her body all around
Come konka yalle, come konka tambee
Solomon and Ryna Belali Shalut
Yaruba Medina Muhammet too.
Nestor Kalina Saraka cake.
Twenty-one children, the last one Jake!
O Solomon don’t leave me here
Cotton balls to choke meO Solomon don’t leave me here
Buckra’s arms to yoke me
Solomon done fly, Solomon done gone
Solomon cut across the sky, Solomon gone
home.
He almost shouted when he heard “Heddy took him to a
red man’s house.” Heddy was Susan Byrd’s grandmother
on her father’s side, and therefore Sing’s mother too. And
“red man’s house” must be a reference to the Byrds as
Indians. Of course! Sing was an Indian or part Indian and
her name was Sing Byrd or, more likely, Sing Bird. No—
Singing Bird! That must have been her name originally—
Singing Bird. And her brother, Crowell Byrd, was probably
Crow Bird, or just Crow. They had mixed their Indian names
with American-sounding names. Milkman had four people
now that he could recognize in the song: Solomon, Jake,
Ryna and Heddy, and a veiled reference to Heddy’s
Indianness. All of which seemed to put Jake and Sing
together in Shalimar, just as Circe had said they were. He
couldn’t be mistaken. These children were singing a story
about his own people! He hummed and chuckled as he did
his best to put it all together.
Jake’s father was Solomon. Did Jake whirl about andtouch the sun? Did Jake leave a baby in a white man’s
house? No. If the “Solomon don’t leave me” line was right,
Solomon was the one who left, who “flew away”—meaning
died or ran off—not Jake. Maybe it was the baby, or Jake
himself, who was begging him to stay. But who was the
“black lady” who fell down on the ground? Why did she
throw her body all around? It sounded like she was having a
fit. Was it because somebody took her baby first to a white
man’s house, then to an Indian’s house? Ryna? Was Ryna
the black lady still crying in the gulch? Was Ryna Solomon’s
daughter? Maybe she had an illegitimate child, and her
father—No. It’s Solomon she is crying for, not a baby.
“Solomon don’t leave me.” He must have been her lover.
Milkman was getting confused, but he was as excited as
a child confronted with boxes and boxes of presents under
the skirt of a Christmas tree. Somewhere in the pile was a
gift for him.
Yet there were many many missing pieces. Susan Byrd,
he thought—she would have to know more than she had
told him. Besides, he had to get his watch back.
He ran back to Solomon’s store and caught a glimpse of
himself in the plate-glass window. He was grinning. His
eyes were shining. He was as eager and happy as he had
ever been in his life.Chapter 13
It was a long time after he left, that warm September
morning, that she was able to relax enough to drop the
knife. When it clattered to the linoleum, she brought her
arms down, oh, so slowly, and cradled her breasts as
though they were two man-goes thumbed over in the
marketplace and pushed aside. She stood that way in the
little rented room with the sunshine pouring in until Guitar
came home. He could not get her to speak or move, so he
picked her up in his arms and carried her downstairs. He
sat her on the bottom step while he went to borrow a car to
drive her home.
Terrible as he thought the whole business was, and
repelled as he was by mindlessness in love, he could not
keep the deep wave of sorrow from engulfing him as he
looked at this really rather pretty woman sitting straight as a
pole, holding her breasts, and staring in front of her out of
hollow eyes.
The engine of the old car he’d borrowed roared, but
spoke softly to her. “You think because he doesn’t love you
that you are worthless. You think because he doesn’t want
you anymore that he is right–that his judgment and opinion
of you are correct. If he throws you out, then you are
garbage. You think he belongs to you because you want tobelong to him. Hagar, don’t. It’s a bad word, ‘belong.’
Especially when you put it with somebody you love. Love
shouldn’t be like that. Did you ever see the way the clouds
love a mountain? They circle all around it; sometimes you
can’t even see the mountain for the clouds. But you know
what? You go up top and what do you see? His head. The
clouds never cover the head. His head pokes through,
because the clouds let him; they don’t wrap him up. They let
him keep his head up high, free, with nothing to hide him or
bind him. Hear me, Hagar?” He spoke to her as he would
to a very young child. “You can’t own a human being. You
can’t lose what you don’t own. Suppose you did own him.
Could you really love somebody who was absolutely
nobody without you? You really want somebody like that?
Somebody who falls apart when you walk out the door? You
don’t, do you? And neither does he. You’re turning over
your whole life to him. Your whole life, girl. And if it means
so little to you that you can just give it away, hand it to him,
then why should it mean any more to him? He can’t value
you more than you value yourself.” He stopped. She did not
move or give any sign that she had heard him.
Pretty woman, he thought. Pretty little black-skinned
woman. Who wanted to kill for love, die for love. The pride,
the conceit of these doormat women amazed him. They
were always women who had been spoiled children.
Whose whims had been taken seriously by adults and who
grew up to be the stingiest, greediest people on earth and
out of their stinginess grew their stingy little love that ateeverything in sight. They could not believe or accept the fact
that they were unloved; they believed that the world itself
was off balance when it appeared as though they were not
loved. Why did they think they were so lovable? Why did
they think their brand of love was better than, or even as
good as, anybody else’s? But they did. And they loved their
love so much they would kill anybody who got in its way.
He looked at her again. Pretty. Pretty little black girl.
Pretty little black-skinned girl. What had Pilate done to her?
Hadn’t anybody told her the things she ought to know? He
thought of his two sisters, grown women now who could
deal, and the litany of their growing up. Where’s your
daddy? Your mama know you out here in the street? Put
something on your head. You gonna catch your death a
cold. Ain’t you hot? Ain’t you cold? Ain’t you scared you
gonna get wet? Uncross your legs. Pull up your socks. I
thought you was goin to the Junior Choir. Your slip is
showin. Your hem is out. Come back in here and iron that
collar. Hush your mouth. Comb your head. Get up from
there and make that bed. Put on the meat. Take out the
trash. Vaseline get rid of that ash.
Neither Pilate nor Reba knew that Hagar was not like
them. Not strong enough, like Pilate, nor simple enough,
like Reba, to make up her life as they had. She needed
what most colored girls needed: a chorus of mamas,
grandmamas, aunts, cousins, sisters, neighbors, Sunday
school teachers, best girl friends, and what all to give herthe strength life demanded of her—and the humor with
which to live it.
Still, he thought, to have the object of your love, worthy or
not, despise you, or leave you…
“You know what, Hagar? Everything I ever loved in my life
left me. My father died when I was four. That was the first
leaving I knew and the hardest. Then my mother. There
were four of us and she just couldn’t cut it when my father
died. She ran away. Just ran away. My aunt took care of us
until my grandmother could get there. Then my grandmother
took care of us. Then Uncle Billy came. They’re both close
to dead now. So it was hard for me to latch on to a woman.
Because I thought if I loved anything it would die. But I did
latch on. Once. But I guess once is all you can manage.”
Guitar thought about it and said, “But I never wanted to kill
her.
 Him,
 yeah. But not her.” He smiled, but Hagar wasn’t
looking, wasn’t even listening, and when he led her out of
the car into Reba’s arms her eyes were still empty.
All they knew to do was love her and since she would not
speak, they brought things to please her. For the first time
in life Reba tried to win things. And, also for the first time,
couldn’t. Except for a portable television set, which they
couldn’t connect because they had no electricity, Reba won
nothing. No raffle ticket, no Bingo, no policy slip, no
clearing-house number, no magazine sweepstakes, no, nor
any unpierced carnival balloon succumbed to her magic. Itwore her down. Puzzled and luckless, she dragged herself
home clutching stalks of anything that blossomed along the
edges of lots and other people’s gardens. These she
presented to her daughter, who sat in a chair by the window
or lay in bed fingering, fingering her hair.
They cooked special things for her; searched for gifts
that they hoped would break the spell. Nothing helped.
Pilate’s lips were still and Reba’s eyes full of panic. They
brought her lipstick and chocolate milk, a pink nylon
sweater and a fuchsia bed jacket. Reba even investigated
the mysteries of making jello, both red and green. Hagar
didn’t even look at it.
One day Pilate sat down on Hagar’s bed and held a
compact before her granddaughter’s face. It was trimmed
in a goldlike metal and had a pink plastic lid.
“Look, baby. See here?” Pilate turned it all around to
show it off and pressed in the catch. The lid sprang open
and Hagar saw a tiny part of her face reflected in the mirror.
She took the compact then and stared into the mirror for a
long while.
“No wonder,” she said at last. “Look at that. No wonder.
No wonder.”
Pilate was thrilled at the sound of Hagar’s voice. “It’s
yours, baby,” she said. “Ain’t it pretty?”“No wonder,” said Hagar. “No wonder.”
“No wonder what?” asked Pilate.
“Look at how I look. I look awful. No wonder he didn’t
want me. I look terrible.” Her voice was calm and
reasonable, as though the last few days hadn’t been lived
through at all. “I need to get up from here and fix myself up.
No
 wonder!
” Hagar threw back the bedcover and stood up.
“Ohhh. I smell too. Mama, heat me some water. I need a
bath. A long one. We got any bath salts left? Oh, Lord, my
head. Look at that.” She peered into the compact mirror
again. “I look like a ground hog. Where’s the comb?”
Pilate called Reba and together they flew through the
house to find the comb, but when they found it Hagar
couldn’t get the teeth through her roped and matted hair.
“Wash it,” said Reba. “Wash it and we’ll comb it while it’s
wet.”
“I need shampoo, then. Real shampoo. I can’t use
Mama’s soap.”
“I’ll go get some.” Reba was trembling a little. “What
kind?”
“Oh, any kind. And get some hair oil, Reba. Posner’s,
and some…Oh, never mind. Just that. Mama? Have you
seen my…Oh, my God. No wonder. No wonder.”Pilate pulled a piece of string from Hagar’s bedspread
and put it in her mouth. “I’ll heat up the water,” she said.
When Reba got back she washed Hagar’s hair, brushed
it, and combed it gently.
“Just make me two braids, Reba. I’m going to have to go
to the beauty shop. Today. Oh, and I need something to
wear.” Hagar stood at the door of the little cardboard
closet, running her hands over the shoulders of dresses.
“Everything’s a mess in here. A mess. All wrinkled…”
“Water’s hot. Where you want the tub?”
“Bring it in here.”
“You think you should be taking a bath so soon?” Reba
asked. “You just got up.”
“Hush, Reba,” said Pilate. “Let the child take care of
herself.”
“But she’s been in the bed three days.”
“All the more reason.”
“I can’t put these things on. Everything’s a mess.” Hagar
was almost in tears.Reba looked at Pilate. “I hope you right. I don’t approve
of getting up too fast and jumping right in some water.”
“Help me with this tub and stop grumbling.”
“All wrinkled. What am I going to wear?”
“That ain’t enough water to cover her feet.”
“It’ll grow when she sits down.”
“Where’s my yellow dress? The one that buttons all the
way down?”
“Somewhere in there, I reckon.”
“Find it for me and press it, would you? I know it’s a
mess. Everything’s a mess.”
Reba found and pressed the yellow dress. Pilate helped
Hagar bathe. Finally a clean and clothed Hagar stood
before the two women and said, “I have to buy some
clothes. New clothes. Everything I have is a mess.”
They looked at each other. “What you need?” asked
Pilate.
“I need everything,” she said, and everything is what she
got. She shopped for everything a woman could wear from
the skin out, with the money from Reba’s diamond. Theyhad seventy-five cents between them when Hagar declared
her needs, and six dollars owed to them from customers.
So the two-thousand-dollar two-carat diamond went to a
pawnshop, where Reba traded it for thirty dollars at first and
then, accompanied by a storming Pilate, she went back
and got one hundred and seventy more for it. Hagar stuffed
two hundred dollars and seventy-five cents into her purse
and headed downtown, still whispering to herself every now
and then, “No wonder.”
She bought a Playtex garter belt, I. Miller No Color hose,
Fruit of the Loom panties, and two nylon slips—one white,
one pink—one pair of Joyce Fancy Free and one of Con
Brio (“Thank heaven for little Joyce heels”). She carried an
armful of skirts and an Evan-Picone two-piece number into
the fitting room. Her little yellow dress that buttoned all the
way down lay on the floor as she slipped a skirt over her
head and shoulders, down to her waist. But the placket
would not close. She sucked in her stomach and pulled the
fabric as far as possible, but the teeth of the zipper would
not join. A light sheen broke out on her forehead as she
huffed and puffed. She was convinced that her whole life
depended on whether or not those aluminum teeth would
meet. The nail of her forefinger split and the balls of her
thumbs ached as she struggled with the placket.
Dampness became sweat and her breath came in gasps.
She was about to weep when the saleswoman poked her
head through the curtain and said brightly, “How are you
doing?” But when she saw Hagar’s gnarled and frightenedface, the smile froze.
“Oh, my,” she said, and reached for the tag hanging from
the skirt’s waist. “This is a five. Don’t force it. You need, oh,
a nine or eleven, I should think. Please. Don’t force it. Let
me see if I have that size.”
She waited until Hagar let the plaid skirt fall down to her
ankles before disappearing. Hagar easily drew on the skirt
the woman brought back, and without further search, said
she would take it and the little two-piece Evan-Picone.
She bought a white blouse next and a nightgown–fawn
trimmed in sea foam. Now all she needed was make-up.
The cosmetics department enfolded her in perfume, and
she read hungrily the labels and the promise. Myrurgia for
primeval woman who creates for him a world of tender
privacy where the only occupant is you, mixed with Nina
Ricci’s L’Air du Temps. Yardley’s Flair with Tuvaché’s
Nectaroma and D’Orsay’s Intoxication. Robert Piguet’s
Fracas, and Calypso and Visa and Bandit. Houbigant’s
Chantilly. Caron’s Fleurs de Rocaille and Bellodgia. Hagar
breathed deeply the sweet air that hung over the glass
counters. Like a smiling sleepwalker she circled. Round
and round the diamond-clear counters covered with bottles,
wafer-thin disks, round boxes, tubes, and phials. Lipsticks
in soft white hands darted out of their sheaths like the shiny
red penises of puppies. Peachy powders and milky lotionswere grouped in front of poster after cardboard poster of
gorgeous grinning faces. Faces in ecstasy. Faces somber
with achieved seduction. Hagar believed she could spend
her life there among the cut glass, shimmering in peaches
and cream, in satin. In opulence. In luxe. In love.
It was five-thirty when Hagar left the store with two
shopping bags full of smaller bags gripped in her hands.
And she didn’t put them down until she reached Lilly’s
Beauty Parlor.
“No more heads, honey.” Lilly looked up from the sink as
Hagar came in.
Hagar stared. “I have to get my hair done. I have to hurry,”
she said.
Lilly looked over at Marcelline. It was Marcelline who kept
the shop prosperous. She was younger, more recently
trained, and could do a light press that lasted. Lilly was still
using redhot irons and an ounce of oil on every head. Her
customers were loyal but dissatisfied. Now she spoke to
Marcelline. “Can you take her? I can’t, I know.”
Marcelline peered deeply into her customer’s scalp.
“Hadn’t planned on any late work. I got two more coming.
This is my eighth today.”
No one spoke. Hagar stared.“Well,” said Marcelline. “Since it’s you, come on back at
eight-thirty. Is it washed already?”
Hagar nodded.
“Okay,” said Marcelline. “Eight-thirty. But don’t expect
nothing fancy.”
“I’m surprised at you,” Lilly chuckled when Hagar left.
“You just sent two people away.”
“Yeah, well, I don’t feel like it, but I don’t want no trouble
with that girl Hagar. No telling what she might do. She jump
that cousin of hers, no telling what she might do to me.”
“That the one going with Macon Dead’s boy?” Lilly’s
customer lifted her head away from the sink.
“That’s her. Ought to be shamed, the two of them.
Cousins.
”
“Must not be working out if she’s trying to kill him.”
“I thought he left town.”
“Wouldn’t you?”
“Well, I know I don’t want to truck with her. Not me.”
“She don’t bother nobody but him.”“Well, Pilate, then. Pilate know I turned her down, she
wouldn’t like it. They spoil that child something awful.”
“Didn’t you order fish from next door?”
“All that hair. I hope she don’t expect nothing fancy.”
“Call him up again. I’m getting hungry.”
“Be just like her. No appointment. No nothing. Come in
here all late and wrong and want something fancy.”
She probably meant to wait somewhere. Or go home
and return to Lilly’s at eight-thirty. Yet the momentum of the
thing held her—it was all of a piece. From the moment she
looked into the mirror in the little pink compact she could
not stop. It was as though she held her breath and could not
let it go until the energy and busyness culminated in a
beauty that would dazzle him. That was why, when she left
Lilly’s, she looked neither right nor left but walked on and
on, oblivious of other people, street lights, automobiles, and
a thunderous sky. She was thoroughly soaked before she
realized it was raining and then only because one of the
shopping bags split. When she looked down, her Evan-
Picone white-with-a-band-of-color skirt was lying in a neat
half fold on the shoulder of the road, and she was far far
from home. She put down both bags, picked the skirt up
and brushed away the crumbs of gravel that stuck to it.
Quickly she refolded it, but when she tried to tuck it backinto the shopping bag, the bag collapsed altogether. Rain
soaked her hair and poured down her neck as she stooped
to repair the damage. She pulled out the box of Con Brios,
a smaller package of Van Raalte gloves, and another
containing her fawn-trimmed-in-sea-foam shortie
nightgown. These she stuffed into the other bag. Retracing
her steps, she found herself unable to carry the heavier bag
in one hand, so she hoisted it up to her stomach and
hugged it with both arms. She had gone hardly ten yards
when the bottom fell out of it. Hagar tripped on Jungle Red
(Sculptura) and Youth Blend, and to her great dismay, saw
her box of Sunny Glow toppling into a puddle. She collected
Jungle Red and Youth Blend safely, but Sunny Glow, which
had tipped completely over and lost its protective disk,
exploded in light peach puffs under the weight of the
raindrops. Hagar scraped up as much of it as she could
and pressed the wilted cellophane disk back into the box.
Twice before she got to Darling Street she had to stop to
retrieve her purchases from the ground. Finally she stood in
Pilate’s doorway, limp, wet, and confused, clutching her
bundles in whatever way she could. Reba was so relieved
to see her that she grabbed her, knocking Chantilly and
Bandit to the floor. Hagar stiffened and pulled away from
her mother.
“I have to hurry,” she whispered. “I have to hurry.”
Loafers sluicing, hair dripping, holding her purchases inher arms, she made it into the bedroom and shut the door.
Pilate and Reba made no move to follow her.
Hagar stripped herself naked there, and without taking
time to dry her face or hair or feet, she dressed herself up
in the white-with-a-band-of-color skirt and matching bolero,
the Maiden-form brassiere, the Fruit of the Loom panties,
the no color hose, the Playtex garter belt and the Joyce con
brios. Then she sat down to attend to her face. She drew
charcoal gray for the young round eye through her brows,
after which she rubbed mango tango on her cheeks. Then
she patted sunny glow all over her face. Mango tango
disappeared under it and she had to put it on again. She
pushed out her lips and spread jungle red over them. She
put baby clear sky light to outwit the day light on her eyelids
and touched bandit to her throat, earlobes, and wrists.
Finally she poured a little youth blend into her palm and
smoothed it over her face.
At last she opened the door and presented herself to
Pilate and Reba. And it was in their eyes that she saw what
she had not seen before in the mirror: the wet ripped hose,
the soiled white dress, the sticky, lumpy face powder, the
streaked rouge, and the wild wet shoals of hair. All this she
saw in their eyes, and the sight filled her own with water
warmer and much older than the rain. Water that lasted for
hours, until the fever came, and then it stopped. The fever
dried her eyes up as well as her mouth.She lay in her little Goldilocks’-choice bed, her eyes sand
dry and as quiet as glass. Pilate and Reba, seated beside
the bed, bent over her like two divi-divi trees beaten
forward by a wind always blowing from the same direction.
Like the trees, they offered her all they had: love murmurs
and a protective shade.
“Mama.” Hagar floated up into an even higher fever.
“Hmmm?”
“Why don’t he like my hair?”
“Who, baby? Who don’t like your hair?”
“Milkman.”
“Milkman does too like your hair,” said Reba.
“No. He don’t. But I can’t figure out why. Why he never
liked my hair.”
“Of course he likes it. How can he not like it?” asked
Pilate.
“He likes silky hair.” Hagar was murmuring so low they
had to bend down to hear her.
“Silky hair? Milkman?”“He don’t like hair like mine.”
“Hush, Hagar.”
“Silky hair the color of a penny.”
“Don’t talk, baby.”
“Curly, wavy, silky hair. He don’t like mine.”
Pilate put her hand on Hagar’s head and trailed her
fingers through her granddaughter’s soft damp wool. “How
can he not love your hair? It’s the same hair that grows out
of his own armpits. The same hair that crawls up out his
crotch on up his stomach. All over his chest. The very same.
It grows out of his nose, over his lips, and if he ever lost his
razor it would grow all over his face. It’s all over his head,
Hagar. It’s his hair too. He got to love it.”
“He don’t love it at all. He hates it.”
“No he don’t. He don’t know what he loves, but he’ll come
around, honey, one of these days. How can he love himself
and hate your hair?”
“He loves silky hair.”
“Hush, Hagar.”
“Penny-colored hair.”“Please, honey.”
“And lemon-colored skin.”
“Shhh.”
“And gray-blue eyes.”
“Hush now, hush.”
“And thin nose.”
“Hush, girl, hush.”
“He’s never going to like my hair.”
“Hush. Hush. Hush, girl, hush.”
The neighbors took up a collection because Pilate and
Reba had spent everything getting Hagar the things
needed to fix herself up. It didn’t amount to much, though,
and it was touch and go whether she’d have a decent
funeral until Ruth walked down to Sonny’s Shop and stared
at Macon without blinking. He reached into his cash drawer
and pulled out two twenty-dollar bills and put them down on
the desk. Ruth didn’t stretch out her hand to pick them up,
or even shift her feet. Macon hesitated, then wheeled
around in his chair and began fiddling with the combination
to his safe. Ruth waited. Macon dipped into the safe three
separate times before Ruth unclasped her hands andreached for the money. “Thank you,” she said, and marched
off to Linden Chapel Funeral Home to make the fastest
arrangements possible.
Two days later, halfway through the service, it seemed as
though Ruth was going to be the lone member of the
bereaved family there. A female quartet from Linden
Baptist Church had already sung “Abide with Me”; the wife
of the mortician had read the condolence cards and the
minister had launched into his “Naked came ye into this life
and naked shall ye depart” sermon, which he had always
believed suitable for the death of a young woman; and the
winos in the vestibule who came to pay their respects to
“Pilate’s girl,” but who dared not enter, had begun to sob,
when the door swung open and Pilate burst in, shouting,
“Mercy!” as though it were a command. A young man stood
up and moved toward her. She flung out her right arm and
almost knocked him down. “I want mercy!” she shouted,
and began walking toward the coffin, shaking her head
from side to side as though somebody had asked her a
question and her answer was no.
Halfway up the aisle she stopped, lifted a finger, and
pointed. Then slowly, although her breathing was fast and
shallow, she lowered her hand to her side. It was strange,
the languorous, limp hand coming to rest at her side while
her breathing was coming so quick and fast. “Mercy,” she
said again, but she whispered it now. The mortician
scurried toward her and touched her elbow. She movedaway from him and went right up to the bier. She tilted her
head and looked down. Her earring grazed her shoulder.
Out of the total blackness of her clothes it blazed like a star.
The mortician tried to approach her again, and moved
closer, but when he saw her inky, berry-black lips, her
cloudy, rainy eyes, the wonderful brass box hanging from
her ear, he stepped back and looked at the floor.
“Mercy?” Now she was asking a question. “Mercy?”
It was not enough. The word needed a bottom, a frame.
She straightened up, held her head high, and transformed
the plea into a note. In a clear bluebell voice she sang it out
—the one word held so long it became a sentence—and
before the last syllable had died in the corners of the room,
she was answered in a sweet soprano: “I hear you.”
The people turned around. Reba had entered and was
singing too. Pilate neither acknowledged her entrance nor
missed a beat. She simply repeated the word “Mercy,” and
Reba replied. The daughter standing at the back of the
chapel, the mother up front, they sang.
In the nighttime.
Mercy.
In the darkness.
Mercy.In the morning.
Mercy.
At my bedside.
Mercy.
On my knees now.
Mercy. Mercy. Mercy. Mercy.
They stopped at the same time in a high silence. Pilate
reached out her hand and placed three fingers on the edge
of the coffin. Now she addressed her words to the woman
bordered in gray satin who lay before her. Softly, privately,
she sang to Hagar the very same reassurance she had
promised her when she was a little girl.
Who’s been botherin my sweet sugar
lumpkin?
Who’s been botherin my baby?
Who’s been botherin my sweet sugar
lumpkin?
Who’s been botherin my baby girl?Somebody’s been botherin my sweet sugar
lumpkin.
Somebody’s been botherin my baby.
Somebody’s been botherin my sweet sugar
lumpkin.
Some
body’s been botherin my baby girl.
I’ll find who’s botherin my sweet sugar
lumpkin.
I’ll find who’s botherin my baby.
I’ll find who’s botherin my sweet sugar
lumpkin.
I’ll find who’s botherin my baby girl.
“My baby girl.” The three words were still pumping in her
throat as she turned away from the coffin. Looking about at
the faces of the people seated in the pews, she fastened
on the first pair of eyes that were directed toward her. She
nodded at the face and said, “My baby girl.” She looked for
another pair of eyes and told him also, “My baby girl.”
Moving back down the aisle, she told each face turnedtoward her the same piece of news. “My baby girl. That’s
my baby girl. My baby girl. My baby girl. My baby girl.”
Conversationally she spoke, identifying Hagar, selecting
her away from everybody else in the world who had died.
First she spoke to the ones who had the courage to look at
her, shake their heads, and say, “Amen.” Then she spoke
to those whose nerve failed them, whose glance would
climb no higher than the long black fingers at her side.
Toward them especially she leaned a little, telling in three
words the full story of the stumped life in the coffin behind
her. “My baby girl.” Words tossed like stones into a silent
canyon.
Suddenly, like an elephant who has just found his anger
and lifts his trunk over the heads of the little men who want
his teeth or his hide or his flesh or his amazing strength,
Pilate trumpeted for the sky itself to hear, “And she was
loved!”
It startled one of the sympathetic winos in the vestibule
and he dropped his bottle, spurting emerald glass and
jungle-red wine everywhere.Chapter 14
Perhaps it was because the sun had hit the rim of the
horizon, but Susan Byrd’s house looked different. The
cedar tree was a silvery gray and its bark crinkled all the
way up. It looked to Milkman like the leg of an ancient
elephant. And now he noticed that the ropes that held the
swing were frayed and the picket fence that had looked so
bright and perky before was really flaked, peeling, even
leaning to the left. The blue steps leading to the porch were
faded into a watery gray. In fact the whole house looked
seedy.
He lifted his hand to knock on the door and noticed the
doorbell. He rang it and Susan Byrd opened the door.
“Hello again,” he said.
“Well,” she said, “you’re as good as your word.”
“I’d like to talk to you some more, if you don’t mind. About
Sing. May I come in?”
“Of course.” She stood back from the door and the odor
of another batch of gingerbread wafted out. Again they sat
in the living room—he in the gray wing-back chair, she on
the sofa this time. Miss Long was nowhere in sight.“I know you don’t know who Sing married or if she
married, but I was wondering—”
“Of course I know who she married. That is if they did
marry. She married Jake, that black boy her mother took
care of.”
Milkman felt dizzy. Everybody kept changing right in front
of him. “But yesterday you said nobody heard from her after
she left.”
“Nobody did. But they knew who she left with!”
“Jake?”
“Jake. Black Jake. Black as coal.”
“Where—where did they live? Boston?”
“I don’t know where they ended up. North, I guess. We
never heard.”
“I thought you said she went to a private school in
Boston.”
She dismissed the whole notion with a wave of her hand.
“I just said that in front of
 her,
 Grace. She talks so much,
you know. Carries tales all over the county. It’s true she was
supposed to go to some school, but she didn’t. She left on
that double-team wagon with that black boy, Jake. A wholelot of slaves got together. Jake was driving. Can you
imagine it? Riding off with a wagonload of slaves?”
“What was Jake’s last name? Can you tell me?”
She shrugged. “I don’t think he had one. He was one of
those flying African children. They must all be dead a long
time now.”
“Flying African children?”
“Urn hm, one of Solomon’s children. Or Shalimar. Papa
said Heddy always called him Shalimar.”
“And Heddy was…”
“My grandmother. Sing’s mother and Papa’s too. An
Indian woman. She was the one who took care of Jake
when his father left them all. She found him and took him
home and raised him. She didn’t have any boy children
then. My father, Crowell, came later.” She leaned forward
and whispered, “She didn’t have a husband, Heddy. I didn’t
want to go into all of that with Grace. You can imagine what
she’d do with that information.
You’re a stranger, so it doesn’t matter. But Grace…”
Susan Byrd looked pleadingly at the ceiling. “This Jake was
a baby she found, and he and Sing grew up together, and I
guess rather than be packed off to some Quaker school,
she ran away with him. You know colored people andIndians mixed a lot, but sometimes, well, some Indians
didn’t like it—the marrying, I mean. But neither one of them
knew their own father, Jake nor Sing. And my own father
didn’t know his. Heddy never said. I don’t know to this day if
he was white, red, or—well—
what.
 Sing’s name was
Singing Bird. And my father’s name was Crow at first. Later
he changed it to Crowell Byrd. After he took off his
buckskin.” She smiled.
“Why did you call Solomon a flying African?”
“Oh, that’s just some old folks’ lie they tell around here.
Some of those Africans they brought over here as slaves
could fly. A lot of them flew back to Africa. The one around
here who did was this same Solomon, or Shalimar—I never
knew which was right. He had a slew of children, all over the
place. You may have noticed that everybody around here
claims kin to him. Must be over forty families spread in
these hills calling themselves Solomon something or other. I
guess he must have been hot stuff.” She laughed. “But
anyway, hot stuff or not, he disappeared and left everybody.
Wife, everybody, including some twenty-one children. And
they say they all saw him go. The wife saw him and the
children saw him. They were all working in the fields. They
used to try to grow cotton here. Can you imagine? In these
hills? But cotton was king then. Everybody grew it until the
land went bad. It was cotton even when I was a girl. Well,
back to this Jake boy. He was supposed to be one of
Solomon’s original twenty-one—all boys and all of themwith the same mother. Jake was the baby. The baby and
the wife were right next to him when he flew off.”
“When you say ‘flew off’ you mean he ran away, don’t
you? Escaped?”
“No, I mean flew. Oh, it’s just foolishness, you know, but
according to the story he wasn’t running away. He was
flying.
He flew. You know, like a bird. Just stood up in the fields
one day, ran up some hill, spun around a couple of times,
and was lifted up in the air. Went right on back to wherever
it was he came from. There’s a big double-headed rock
over the valley named for him. It like to killed the woman, the
wife. I guess you could say ‘wife.’ Anyway she’s supposed
to have screamed out loud for days. And there’s a ravine
near here they call Ryna’s Gulch, and sometimes you can
hear this funny sound by it that the wind makes. People say
it’s the wife, Solomon’s wife, crying. Her name was Ryna.
They say she screamed and screamed, lost her mind
completely. You don’t hear about women like that anymore,
but there used to be more—the kind of woman who couldn’t
live without a particular man. And when the man left, they
lost their minds, or died or something. Love, I guess. But I
always thought it was trying to take care of children by
themselves, you know what I mean?”
She talked on and on while Milkman sat back andlistened to gossip, stories, legends, speculations. His mind
was ahead of hers, behind hers, with hers, and bit by bit,
with what she said, what he knew, and what he guessed, he
put it all together.
Sing had said she was going to a Quaker school, but she
joined Jake on his wagonful of ex-slaves heading for
Boston or somewhere. They must have dropped their
passengers all along the way. And then Jake, at the reins,
took a wrong turn, because he couldn’t read, and they
ended up in Pennsylvania.
“But there’s a children’s game they play around here.
And in the game they sing, ‘Jake the
 only
 son of Solomon.’
Only.
” He looked at her, hoping she wouldn’t mind the
interruption.
“Well, they’re wrong. He wasn’t the only son. There were
twenty others. But he was the only one Solomon tried to
take with him. Maybe that’s what it means. He lifted him up,
but dropped him near the porch of the big house. That’s
where Heddy found him. She used to come over there and
help with the soapmaking and the candlemaking. She
wasn’t a slave, but she worked over at the big house
certain times of year. She was melting tallow when she
looked up and saw this man holding a baby and flying
toward the ridge. He brushed too close to a tree and the
baby slipped out of his arms and fell through the branches
to the ground. He was unconscious, but the trees saved himfrom dying. Heddy ran over and picked him up. She didn’t
have any male children, like I said, just a little bitty girl, and
this one just dropped out of the sky almost in her lap. She
never named him anything different; she was afraid to do
that. She found out the baby was Ryna’s, but Ryna was out
of her mind. Heddy lived a good ways off from the place
Solomon and them others worked on. She tried to keep the
girl away from that place too. And you can imagine how she
felt when both of them ran off. Just my father was left.”
“Did Jake have to register at the Freedmen’s Bureau
before he left the state?”
“Everybody did. Everybody who had been slaves, that is.
Whether they left the state or not. But we were never slaves,
so—”
“You told me that. Weren’t any of Jake’s brothers
registering too?”
“I couldn’t say. Those must have been some times, back
then. Some bad times. It’s a wonder anybody knows who
anybody is.”
“You’ve helped me a lot, Miss Byrd. I’m grateful.” He
thought then about asking her if she had a photo album. He
wanted to see Sing, Crowell, even Heddy. But he decided
against it. She might start asking him questions, and he
didn’t want to trouble her with a new-found relative who wasas black as Jake.
“Now, that’s not the woman you’re looking, is it? Pilate?”
“No,” he said. “Couldn’t be.” He made motions of
departure and then remembered his watch.
“By did I leave my watch here? I’d like it back.”
“Watch?”
“Yes. Your friend wanted to see it. Miss Long. I handed it
to her but I forgot—” Milkman stopped. Susan Byrd was
laughing out loud.
“Well, you can say goodbye to it, Mr. Macon. Grace will
go to dinner all over the county telling people about the
watch you gave her.”
“What?”
“Well, you know. She doesn’t mean any real harm, but it’s
a quiet place. We don’t have many visitors, especially
young men who wear gold watches and have northern
accents. I’ll get it back for you.”
“Never mind. Never mind.”
“You’ll just have to forgive her otherwise. This is a dull
place, Mr. Macon. There’s absolutely nothing in the worldgoing on here. Not a thing.”Chapter 15
The fan belt didn’t last long enough for him to get to the next
gasoline station. It broke on the edge of a little town called
Jistann, the needle trembling at H. Milkman sold it to the
tow-truck man for twenty dollars and caught the first bus out.
It was probably best that way, for over the humming wheels,
his legs folded in the little space in front of his seat, he had
time to come down from the incredible high that had begun
as soon as he slammed the Byrd woman’s door.
He couldn’t get back to Shalimar fast enough, and when
he did get there, dusty and dirty from the run, he leaped into
the car and drove to Sweet’s house. He almost broke her
door down. “I want to swim!” he shouted. “Come on, let’s go
swimming. I’m dirty and I want waaaaater!”
Sweet smiled and said she’d give him a bath.
“Bath! You think I’d put myself in that tight little porcelain
box? I need the sea! The whole goddam sea!” Laughing,
hollering, he ran over to her and picked her up at the knees
and ran around the room with her over his shoulder. “The
sea! I have to swim in the sea. Don’t give me no itty bitty
teeny tiny tub, girl. I need the whole entire complete deep
blue sea!”
He stood her on her feet. “Don’t you all swim aroundhere?”
“Over at the quarry is where the kids go sometimes.”
“Quarry? You all don’t have no sea? No ocean?”
“Naw; this hill country.”
“Hill country. Mountain country. Flying country.”
“A man was here to see you.”
“Oh, yeah? That would be Mr. Guitar Bains.”
“He didn’t give his name.”
“He don’t have to! He’s Guitar Bains. Gitar, Gitar, Gitar
Bains!” Milkman did a little dance and Sweet covered her
mouth, laughing.
“Come on, Sweet, tell me where the sea is.”
“They some water comin down below the ridge on the
other side. Real deep; wide too.”
“Then let’s go! Come on!” He grabbed her arm and
pulled her out to the car. He sang all the way: “‘Solomon ’n
Ryna Belali Shalut…’”
“Where you learn that?” she asked him. “That’s a game
we used to play when we was little.”“Of course you did. Everybody did. Everybody but me.
But I can play it now. It’s my game now.”
The river in the valley was wide and green. Milkman took
off his clothes, climbed a tree and dived into the water. He
surfaced like a bullet, iridescent, grinning, splashing water.
“Come on. Take them clothes off and come on in here.”
“Naw. I don’t wanna swim.”
“Come in here, girl!”
“Water moccasins in there.”
“Fuck ’em. Get in here. Hurry up!”
She stepped out of her shoes, pulled her dress over her
head and was ready. Milkman reached up for her as she
came timidly down the bank, slipping, stumbling, laughing
at her own awkwardness, then squealing as the cold river
water danced up her legs, her hips, her waist. Milkman
pulled her close and kissed her mouth, ending the kiss with
a determined effort to pull her under the water. She fought
him. “Oh, my hair! My hair’s gonna get wet.”
“No it ain’t,” he said, and poured a handful right in the
middle of her scalp. Wiping her eyes, spluttering water, she
turned to wade out, shrieking all the way. “Okay, okay,” he
bellowed. “Leave me. Leave me in here by myself. I don’tcare. I’ll play with the water moccasins.” And he began to
whoop and dive and splash and turn. “He could fly! You
hear me? My great-granddaddy could fly! Goddam!” He
whipped the water with his fists, then jumped straight up as
though he too could take off, and landed on his back and
sank down, his mouth and eyes full of water. Up again. Still
pounding, leaping, diving. “The son of a bitch could fly! You
hear me, Sweet? That motherfucker could fly! Could fly! He
didn’t need no airplane. Didn’t need no fuckin tee double
you ay. He could fly his own self!”
“Who you talkin ‘bout?” Sweet was lying on her side, her
cheek cupped in her hand.
“Solomon, that’s who.”
“Oh, him.” She laughed. “You belong to that tribe of
niggers?” She thought he was drunk.
“Yeah. That tribe. That flyin motherfuckin tribe. Oh, man!
He didn’t need no airplane. He just took off; got fed up.
 All
the way up!
 No more cotton! No more bales! No more
orders! No more shit! He flew, baby. Lifted his beautiful
black ass up in the sky and flew on home. Can you dig it?
Jesus God, that must have been something to see. And you
know what else? He tried to take his baby boy with him. My
grandfather. Wow! Woooee! Guitar! You hear that? Guitar,
my great-granddaddy could flyyyyyy and the whole damn
town is named after him. Tell him, Sweet. Tell him my great-granddaddy could fly.”
“Where’d he go, Macon?”
“Back to Africa. Tell Guitar he went back to Africa.”
“Who’d he leave behind?”
“Everybody! He left everybody down on the ground and
he sailed on off like a black eagle. ‘O-o-o-o-o-o Solomon
done fly, Solomon done gone /Solomon cut across the sky,
Solomon gone home!’”
He could hardly wait to get home. To tell his father, Pilate;
and he would love to see Reverend Cooper and
 his
 friends.
“You think Macon Dead was something? Huh. Let me tell
you about his daddy. You ain’t heard nothin yet.”
Milkman turned in his seat and tried to stretch his legs. It
was morning. He’d changed buses three times and was
now speeding home on the last leg of his trip. He looked
out the window. Far away from Virginia, fall had already
come. Ohio, Indiana, Michigan were dressed up like the
Indian warriors from whom their names came. Blood red
and yellow, ocher and ice blue.
He read the road signs with interest now, wondering what
lay beneath the names. The Algonquins had named the
territory he lived in Great Water,
 michi gami.
 How many
dead lives and fading memories were buried in andbeneath the names of the places in this country. Under the
recorded names were other names, just as “Macon Dead,”
recorded for all time in some dusty file, hid from view the
real names of people, places, and things. Names that had
meaning. No wonder Pilate put hers in her ear. When you
know your name, you should hang on to it, for unless it is
noted down and remembered, it will die when you do. Like
the street he lived on, recorded as Mains Avenue, but
called Not Doctor Street by the Negroes in memory of his
grandfather, who was the first colored man of consequence
in that city. Never mind that he probably didn’t deserve their
honor–they knew what kind of man he was: arrogant, color-
struck, snobbish. They didn’t care about that. They were
paying their respect to whatever it was that made him
 be
 a
doctor in the first place, when the odds were that he’d be a
yardman all of his life. So they named a street after him.
Pilate had taken a rock from every state she had lived in–
because she
 had
 lived there. And having lived there, it was
hers–and his, and his father’s, his grandfather’s, his
grandmother’s. Not Doctor Street, Solomon’s Leap, Ryna’s
Gulch, Shalimar, Virginia.
He closed his eyes and thought of the black men in
Shalimar, Roanoke, Petersburg, Newport News, Danville,
in the Blood Bank, on Darling Street, in the pool halls, the
barbershops. Their names. Names they got from yearnings,
gestures, flaws, events, mistakes, weaknesses. Names
that bore witness. Macon Dead, Sing Byrd, Crowell Byrd,
Pilate, Reba, Hagar, Magdalene, First Corinthians,Milkman, Guitar, Railroad Tommy, Hospital Tommy,
Empire State (he just stood around and swayed), Small
Boy, Sweet, Circe, Moon, Nero, Humpty-Dumpty, Blue Boy,
Scandinavia, Quack-Quack, Jericho, Spoonbread, Ice
Man, Dough Belly, Rocky River, Gray Eye, Cock-a-Doodle-
Doo, Cool Breeze, Muddy Waters, Pinetop, Jelly Roll, Fats,
Lead-belly, Bo Diddley, Cat-Iron, Peg-Leg, Son, Shortstuff,
Smoky Babe, Funny Papa, Bukka, Pink, Bull Moose, B.B.,
T-Bone, Black Ace, Lemon, Washboard, Gatemouth,
Cleanhead, Tampa Red, Juke Boy, Shine, Staggerlee, Jim
the Devil, Fuck-Up, and Dat Nigger.
Angling out from these thoughts of names was one more
—the one that whispered in the spinning wheels of the bus:
“Guitar is biding his time. Guitar is biding his time. Your day
has come. Your day has come. Guitar is biding his time.
Guitar is a very good Day. Guitar is a very good Day. A
very good Day, a very good Day, and biding, biding his
time.”
In the seventy-five-dollar car, and here on the big
Greyhound, Milkman felt safe. But there were days and
days ahead. Maybe if Guitar was back in the city now,
among familiar surroundings, Milkman could defuse him.
And certainly, in time, he would discover his foolishness.
There was no gold. And although things would never be the
same between them, at least the man-hunt would be over.
Even as he phrased the thought in his mind, Milkmanknew it was not so. Either Guitar’s disappointment with the
gold that was not there was so deep it had deranged him,
or his “work” had done it. Or maybe he simply allowed
himself to feel about Milkman what he had always felt about
Macon Dead and the Honoré crowd. In any case, he had
snatched the first straw, limp and wet as it was, to prove to
himself the need to kill Milkman. The Sunday-school girls
deserved better than to be avenged by that hawk-headed
raven-skinned Sunday man who included in his blood
sweep four innocent white girls and one innocent black
man.
Perhaps that’s what all human relationships boiled down
to: Would you save my life? or would you take it?
“Everybody wants a black man’s life.”
Yeah. And black men were not excluded. With two
exceptions, everybody he was close to seemed to prefer
him out of this life. And the two exceptions were both
women, both black, both old. From the beginning, his
mother and Pilate had fought for his life, and he had never
so much as made either of them a cup of tea.
Would you save my life or would you take it? Guitar was
exceptional. To both questions he could answer yes.
“Should I go home first, or go to Pilate’s first?” Out in the
street, late at night with autumn air blowing cold off the lake,he tried to make up his mind. He was so eager for the sight
of Pilate’s face when he told her what he knew, he decided
to see her first. He’d have a long time at his own house. He
took a taxi to Darling Street, paid the driver, and bounded
up the stairs. He pushed the door open and saw her
standing over a tub of water, rinsing out the green bottles
she used for her wine.
“Pilate!” he shouted. “Have I got stuff to tell you!”
She turned around. Milkman opened his arms wide so he
could hold all of her in a warm embrace. “Come here,
sweet-heart,” he said, grinning. She came and broke a wet
green bottle over his head.
When he came to, he was lying on his side in the cellar.
He opened one eye and considered the option of not
coming to for a little while more. For a long time now he
knew that anything could appear to be something else, and
probably was. Nothing could be taken for granted. Women
who loved you tried to cut your throat, while women who
didn’t even know your name scrubbed your back. Witches
could sound like Katharine Hepburn and your best friend
could try to strangle you. Smack in the middle of an orchid
there might be a blob of jello and inside a Mickey Mouse
doll, a fixed and radiant star.
So he lay on the cool damp floor of the cellar and tried to
figure out what he was doing there. What did Pilate knockhim out for? About the theft of her sack of bones? No.
She’d come to his rescue immediately. What could it be,
what else could he have done that would turn her against
him? Then he knew. Hagar. Something had happened to
Hagar. Where was she? Had she run off? Was she sick
or…Hagar was dead. The cords of his neck tightened.
How? In Guitar’s room, did she…?
What difference did it make? He had hurt her, left her,
and now she was dead—he was certain of it. He had left
her. While he dreamt of flying, Hagar was dying. Sweet’s
silvery voice came back to him: “Who’d he leave behind?”
He left Ryna behind and twenty children. Twenty-one, since
he dropped the one he tried to take with him. And Ryna had
thrown herself all over the ground, lost her mind, and was
still crying in a ditch. Who looked after those twenty
children? Jesus Christ, he left twenty-one children! Guitar
and the Days chose never to have children. Shalimar left
his, but it was the children who sang about it and kept the
story of his leaving alive.
Milkman rolled his head back and forth on the cellar floor.
It was his fault, and Pilate knew it. She had thrown him in
the cellar. What, he wondered, did she plan to do with him?
Then he knew that too. Knew what Pilate’s version of
punishment was when somebody took another person’s
life. Hagar. Something of Hagar’s must be nearby. Pilate
would put him someplace near something that remained of
the life he had taken, so he could
 have
 it. She would abideby this commandment from her father herself, and make
him do it too. “You just can’t fly on off and leave a body.”
Suddenly Milkman began to laugh. Curled up like a
Polish sausage, a rope cutting his wrists, he laughed.
“Pilate!” he called. “Pilate! That’s not what he meant.
Pilate! He didn’t mean that. He wasn’t talking about the
man in the cave. Pilate! He was talking about himself. His
own father flew away. He was the ‘body.’ The body you
shouldn’t fly off and leave. Pilate! Pilate! Come here. Let
me tell you what your father said. Pilate, he didn’t even tell
you to sing, Pilate. He was calling for his wife—your
mother. Pilate! Get me out of here!”
Light exploded in his face. The cellar door opened over
his head. Pilate’s feet appeared on the stone steps, and
paused.
“Pilate,” said Milkman, softly now, “that’s not what he
meant. I know what he meant. Come, let me tell you. And
Pilate, those bones. They’re not that white man’s bones. He
probably didn’t even die. I went there. I saw. He wasn’t
there and the gold wasn’t there either. Somebody found it
and found him too. They must have, Pilate. Long before you
got there. But, Pilate…”
She descended a few steps.
“Pilate?”She came all the way down and he looked in her eyes
and at her still mouth. “Pilate, your father’s body floated up
out of the grave you all dug for him. One month later it
floated up. The Butlers, somebody, put his body in the cave.
Wolves didn’t drag the white man to the front of the cave
and prop him on a rock. That was your father you found.
You’ve been carrying your father’s bones—all this time.”
“Papa?” she whispered.
“Yes. And, Pilate, you have to bury him. He wants you to
bury him. Back where he belongs. On Solomon’s Leap.”
“Papa?” she asked again.
Milkman did not speak; he watched her long fingers
travel up her dress, to rest like the wing of a starling on her
face. “I’ve been carryin Papa?” Pilate moved toward
Milkman, stopped and looked at him for a while. Then her
eyes turned to a rickety wooden table that stood against the
stone wall of the cellar. It was in a part of the room so dark
he had not even seen it. She walked over to the table and
lifted from it a green-and-white shoe box, its cover held
down with a rubber band. “Joyce,” it said on the box. “Thank
heaven for little Joyce heels.”
“If I bury Papa, I guess I ought to bury this too—
somewhere.” She looked back at Milkman.“No,” he said. “No. Give it here.”
When he went home that evening, he walked into the
house on Not Doctor Street with almost none of the things
he’d taken with him. But he returned with a box of Hagar’s
hair.
She wouldn’t set foot on an airplane, so he drove. She
seemed happy now. Her lips mobile again, she sat next to
him in Macon’s Buick, a mink stole Reba had won wrapped
around her shoulders over her old black dress. The knit cap
was pulled down on her forehead and her shoes still had no
laces. Every now and then she glanced at the back seat to
check on the sack. Peace circled her.
Milkman felt it too. His return to Not Doctor Street was
not the triumph he’d hoped it would be, but there was relief
in his mother’s crooked smile. And Lena, though
unforgiving as ever, was civil to him, since Corinthians had
moved to a small house in Southside, which she shared
with Porter. The Seven Days, Milkman guessed, would be
looking for a new recruit, as they had to when Robert Smith
jumped off the roof of Mercy. But there were long rambling
talks with his father, who could not hear it enough—the
“boys” who remembered him in Danville; his mother’s
running off with his father; the story about his father and his
grandfather. He wasn’t a bit interested in the flying part, but
he liked the story and the fact that places were named for
his people. Milkman softened his description of Circe,saying simply that she was alive, and taking care of the
dogs.
“I ought maybe to take me a trip down there,” said
Macon.
“Virginia?” Milkman asked him.
“Danville. I ought to go by and see some of those boys
before these legs stop moving. Let Freddie pick up the
rents, maybe.”
It was nice. No reconciliation took place between Pilate
and Macon (although he seemed pleased to know that they
were going to bury their father in Virginia), and relations
between Ruth and Macon were the same and would always
be. Just as the consequences of Milkman’s own stupidity
would remain, and regret would always outweigh the things
he was proud of having done. Hagar was dead and he had
not loved her one bit. And Guitar was … somewhere.
In Shalimar there was general merriment at his quick
return, and Pilate blended into the population like a stick of
butter in a churn. They stayed with Omar’s family, and on
the second and last evening, Milkman and Pilate walked up
the road to the path that led to Solomon’s Leap. It was the
higher of two outcroppings of rock. Both flat-headed, both
looking over a deep valley. Pilate carried the sack, Milkman
a small shovel. It was a long way to the top, but neitherstopped for breath. At the very top, on the plateau, the trees
that could stand the wind at that height were few. They
looked a long time for an area of earth among the rock
faces large enough for the interment. When they found one,
Pilate squatted down and opened the sack while Milkman
dug. A deep sigh escaped from the sack and the wind
turned chill. Ginger, a spicy sugared ginger smell,
enveloped them. Pilate laid the bones carefully into the
small grave. Milkman heaped dirt over them and packed it
down with the back of his shovel.
“Should we put a rock or a cross on it?” Milkman asked.
Pilate shook her head. She reached up and yanked her
earring from her ear, splitting the lobe. Then she made a
little hole with her fingers and placed in it Sing’s snuffbox
with the single word Jake ever wrote. She stood up then,
and it seemed to Milkman that he heard the shot after she
fell. He dropped to his knees and cradled her lolling head in
the crook of his arm, barking at her, “You hurt? You hurt,
Pilate?”
She laughed softly and he knew right away that she was
reminded of the day he first met her and said the most
stupid thing there was to say.
The twilight had thickened and all around them it was
getting dark. Milkman moved his hand over her chest and
stomach, trying to find the place where she might be hit.“Pilate? You okay?” He couldn’t make out her eyes. His
hand under her head was sweating like a fountain. “Pilate?”
She sighed. “Watch Reba for me.” And then, “I wish I’d a
knowed more people. I would of loved ’em all. If I’d a
knowed more, I would a loved more.”
Milkman bent low to see her face and saw darkness
staining his hand. Not sweat, but blood oozing from her
neck down into his cupped hand. He pressed his fingers
against the skin as if to force the life back in her, back into
the place it was escaping from. But that only made it flow
faster. Frantically he thought of tourniquets and could even
hear the rip of cloth he should have been tearing. He shifted
his weight and was about to lay her down, the better to
wrap her wound, when she spoke again.
“Sing,” she said. “Sing a little somethin for me.”
Milkman knew no songs, and had no singing voice that
anybody would want to hear, but he couldn’t ignore the
urgency in her voice. Speaking the words without the least
bit of a tune, he sang for the lady. “Sugargirl don’t leave me
here/ Cotton balls to choke me/Sugargirl don’t leave me
here/ Buckra’s arms to yoke me.” The blood was not
pulsing out any longer and there was something black and
bubbly in her mouth. Yet when she moved her head a little
to gaze at something behind his shoulder, it took a while for
him to realize that she was dead. And when he did, hecould not stop the worn old words from coming, louder and
louder as though sheer volume would wake her. He woke
only the birds, who shuddered off into the air. Milkman laid
her head down on the rock. Two of the birds circled round
them. One dived into the new grave and scooped
something shiny in its beak before it flew away.
Now he knew why he loved her so. Without ever leaving
the ground, she could fly. “There must be another one like
you,” he whispered to her. “There’s got to be at least one
more woman like you.”
Even as he knelt over her, he knew there wouldn’t be
another mistake; that the minute he stood up Guitar would
try to blow his head off. He stood up.
“Guitar!” he shouted.
Tar tar tar,
 said the hills.
“Over here, brother man! Can you see me?” Milkman
cupped his mouth with one hand and waved the other over
his head. “Here I am!”
Am am am am,
 said the rocks.
“You want me? Huh? You want my life?”
Life life life life.Squatting on the edge of the other flat-headed rock with
only the night to cover him, Guitar smiled over the barrel of
his rifle. “My man,” he murmured to himself. “My main man.”
He put the rifle on the ground and stood up.
Milkman stopped waving and narrowed his eyes. He
could just make out Guitar’s head and shoulders in the
dark. “You want my life?” Milkman was not shouting now.
“You need it? Here.” Without wiping away the tears, taking
a deep breath, or even bending his knees—he leaped. As
fleet and bright as a lodestar he wheeled toward Guitar and
it did not matter which one of them would give up his ghost
in the killing arms of his brother. For now he knew what
Shalimar knew: If you surrendered to the air, you could
 ride
it.Toni Morrison
SONG OF SOLOMON
Toni Morrison is the Robert F. Goheen Professor of
Humanities at Princeton University. She has received the
National Book Critics Circle Award and the Pulitzer Prize.
In 1993 she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
She lives in Rockland County, New York, and Princeton,
New Jersey.
Also by Toni Morrison
FICTION
Love
Paradise
fazz
Beloved
Tar Baby
Sula
The Bluest Eye
NONFICTION
The Dancing Mind
Playing in the Dark:
Whiteness and the Literary ImaginationALSO BY
 T
ONI
 M
ORRISON
BELOVED
In Morrison’s Pulitzer Prize–winning novel, set in post–Civil
War Ohio, Sethe, an escaped slave, has wrenched herself
from living death, has lost a husband, and buried a child.
She now lives with her daughter, her mother-in-law, and the
disturbing apparition called Beloved.
Fiction/Literature/1-4000-3341-1
JAZZ
Joe Trace shoots to death his lover of three months, the
impetuous, eighteen-year-old Dorcas. Richly combining
history, legend, and reminiscence, Morrison captures the
ineffable mood and the complex humanity of black urban
life at a crucial moment in history.
Fiction/Literature/1-4000-7621-8
SULA
Sula and Nel meet when they are twelve, wishbone thin and
dreaming of princes. They share everything until Sulaescapes the Bottom, their hilltop neighborhood of fierce
resentment. After roaming America, misfit Sula returns to
find Nel acculturated to life in the Bottom.
Fiction/Literature/1-4000-3343-8
TAR BABY
Jadine, Sorbonne educated and comfortably well off, meets
a black American street man and finds herself moving
inexorably toward him; he is a kind of man she has
dreaded since childhood: uneducated, violent, and
contemptuous of her privilege.
Fiction/Literature/1-4000-3344-6
ALSO AVAILABLE
:
Playing In The Dark:
Whiteness and the Literary Imagination,
 0-679-
74542-4
VINTAGE BOOKS
Available at your local bookstore, or call toll-free to
order:
1-800-793-2665 (credit cards only)Acclaim for Toni Morrison’s
SONG OF SOLOMON
“It places Toni Morrison in the front rank of contemporary
American writers. She has written a novel that will endure.”
—The Washington Post
“Lovely…. A delight, full of lyrical variety and allusiveness….
[An] exceptionally diverse novel.”
—The Atlantic Monthly
“A rich, full novel…. It lifts us up [and] impresses itself upon
us like a love affair.”
—The New York Times Book Review
“Morrison dazzles…. She creates a black community
strangely unto itself yet never out of touch with the white
world…. With an ear as sharp as glass she has listened to
the music of black talk and uses it as a palette knife to
create black lives and to provide some of the best fictional
dialogue around today.”
—The Nation“A marvelous novel, the most moving I have read in ten
years of reviewing.”
—The Plain Dealer
“Toni Morrison has created a fanciful world here…. She has
an impeccable sense of emotional detail. She’s the most
sensible lyrical writer around today.”
—The Philadelphia Inquirer
“A fine novel exuberantly constructed…. So rich in its use of
common speech, so sophisticated in its use of literary
traditions and language from the Bible to Faulkner…it is
also extremely funny.”
—
The Hudson Review
“Toni Morrison is an extraordinarily good writer. Two pages
into anything she writes one feels the power of her
language and the emotional authority behind that
language…. One closes the book warmed through by the
richness of its sympathy, and by its breathtaking feel for the
nature of sexual sorrow.”
—
The Village Voice
“Morrison moves easily in and out of the lives and thoughts
of her characters, luxuriating in the diversity of
circumstances and personality, and revelling in the sound of
their voices and of her own, which echoes and elaboratestheirs.”
—
The New YorkerFIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, JUNE
2004
Copyright
 © 1977, 2004
 by Toni Morrison
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States by
Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New
York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of
Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published in slightly
different form in hardcover in the United States by Alfred A.
Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, in
1977.
Vintage is a registered trademark and Vintage International
and colophon are trademarks of Random House, Inc.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the Knopf edition
as follows:
Morrison, Toni.
Song of Solomon.
I. Title.
PZ4.M883So [PS3563.08749]813'.5'4
77-874
www.vintagebooks.com
eISBN: 978-0-307-38812-4
v3.0acclaim for
Toni Morrison
“[Toni Morrison] may be the last classic American writer,
squarely in the tradition of Poe, Melville, Twain and Faulkner.”
—Newsweek
“In the ﬁrst ranks of our living novelists.”
—St. Louis Post-Dispatch
“Toni Morrison is not just an important contemporary novelist
but a major ﬁgure in our national literature.”
—The New York Review of Books
“She is the best writer in America.”
—John Leonard, National Public Radio
“[Toni Morrison] has moved from strength to strength until
she has reached the distinction of being beyond comparison.”
—Entertainment Weekly
“Morrison is one of the most exciting living American writers.”
—The Kansas City Star“Toni Morrison has made herself into the D. H. Lawrence of
the black psyche, transforming individuals into forces, idio-syncrasy into inevitability.” — New York
“Morrison is perhaps the ﬁnest novelist of our time.” — Vogue
“Toni Morrison is one of the ﬁnest writers in America today.”
—Louisville Courier-JournalThe Bluest EyeToni Morrison
The Bluest Eye
Toni Morrison is the Robert F. Goheen Professor of Humani-
ties, Emeritus at Princeton University. She has received theNational Book Critics Circle Award and the Pulitzer Prize. In1993 she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature. She livesin Rockland County, New York, and Princeton, New Jersey.
also by toni morrison
fiction
Love
Paradise
Jazz
Beloved
Tar Baby
Song of Solomon
Sula
nonfiction
The Dancing Mind
Playing in the Dark: 
Whiteness and the Literary ImaginationL THE
BLUEST
EYE L
a novel
Toni Morrison
vintage international
Vintage Books
A Division of Random House, Inc.
New YorkFIRST VINTAGE INTERNATIONAL EDITION, MAY 2007
Copyright ©1970, copyright renewed 1998 by Toni Morrison
Foreword © 1993 , 2007 by Toni Morrison
All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Vintage Books,
a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and in Canada by Random
House of Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published in hardcover in 
the United States by Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc, in 1970 , and 
subsequently published in slightly different form in hardcover 
by Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Random House, Inc., in 1993 .
Vintage is a registered trademark and Vintage International and colophon 
are trademarks of Random House, Inc.
Portions of the foreword were previously published as the 
afterword to the 1993 Knopf edition.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the Knopf edition as follows:
Morrison, Toni.
The bluest eye / by Toni Morrison. — 1st ed.
p. cm.
1. Afro-Americans—Ohio—Fiction. 2. Girls—Ohio—Fiction. I. Title
PS3563.08749855 1993
813.54—dc20
93-43124
eISBN: 978- 0-307-38658-8
www.vintagebooks.com
v1.0
To the two who gave me life
and the one who made me freeForeword
There can’t be anyone, I am sure, who doesn’t know what it
feels like to be disliked, even rejected, momentarily or for sus-tained periods of time. Perhaps the feeling is merely indiffer-ence, mild annoyance, but it may also be hurt. It may even bethat some of us know what it is like to be actually hated—hated for things we have no control over and cannot change.When this happens, it is some consolation to know that thedislike or hatred is unjustiﬁed—that you don’t deserve it. Andif you have the emotional strength and/or support from familyand friends, the damage is reduced or erased. We think of it asthe stress (minor or disabling) that is part of life as a human.
When I began writing The Bluest Eye , I was interested
in something else. Not resistance to the contempt of oth-ers, ways to deﬂect it, but the far more tragic and disablingconsequences of accepting rejection as legitimate, as self-evident. I knew that some victims of powerful self-loathingturn out to be dangerous, violent, reproducing the enemywho has humiliated them over and over. Others surrendertheir identity; melt into a structure that delivers the strong
persona they lack. Most others, however, grow beyond it.But there are some who collapse, silently, anonymously, withno voice to express or acknowledge it. They are invisible. Thedeath of self-esteem can occur quickly, easily in children,before their ego has “legs,” so to speak. Couple the vulnera-bility of youth with indifferent parents, dismissive adults, anda world, which, in its language, laws, and images, re-enforcesdespair, and the journey to destruction is sealed.
The project, then, for this, my ﬁrst book, was to enter the
life of the one least likely to withstand such damaging forcesbecause of youth, gender, and race. Begun as a bleak narra-tive of psychological murder, the main character could notstand alone since her passivity made her a narrative void. SoI invented friends, classmates, who understood, even sympa-thized, with her plight, but had the beneﬁt of supportive par-ents and a feistiness all their own. Yet they were helpless aswell. They could not save their friend from the world. Shebroke.
The origin of the novel lay in a conversation I had with a
childhood friend. We had just started elementary school. Shesaid she wanted blue eyes. I looked around to picture herwith them and was violently repelled by what I imagined shewould look like if she had her wish. The sorrow in her voiceseemed to call for sympathy, and I faked it for her, but,astonished by the desecration she proposed, I “got mad” ather instead.
Until that moment I had seen the pretty, the lovely, the
nice, the ugly, and although I had certainly used the word“beautiful,” I had never experienced its shock—the force ofwhich was equaled by the knowledge that no one recognizedit, not even, or especially, the one who possessed it. ForewordIt must have been more than the face I was examining:
the silence of the street in the early afternoon, the light, theatmo-sphere of confession. In any case it was the ﬁrst time Iknew beautiful. Had imagined it for myself. Beauty was notsimply something to behold; it was something one could do.
The Bluest Eye was my effort to say something about
that; to say something about why she had not, or possiblyever would have, the experience of what she possessed andalso why she prayed for so radical an alteration. Implicit inher desire was racial self-loathing. And twenty years later, Iwas still wondering about how one learns that. Who toldher? Who made her feel that it was better to be a freak thanwhat she was? Who had looked at her and found her sowanting, so small a weight on the beauty scale? The novelpecks away at the gaze that condemned her.
The reclamation of racial beauty in the sixties stirred
these thoughts, made me think about the necessity for theclaim. Why, although reviled by others, could this beautynot be taken for granted within the community? Why did itneed wide public articulation to exist? These are not cleverquestions. But in 1962 when I began this story, and in 1965
when it began to be a book, the answers were not as obviousto me as they quickly became and are now. The assertion ofracial beauty was not a reaction to the self-mocking, humor-ous critique of cultural/racial foibles common in all groups,but against the damaging internalization of assumptions of immutable inferiority originating in an outside gaze. Ifocused, therefore, on how something as grotesque as thedemonization of an entire race could take root inside themost delicate member of society: a child; the most vulnera-ble member: a female. In trying to dramatize the devastationthat even casual racial contempt can cause, I chose a uniquexisituation, not a representative one. The extremity of Pecola’s
case stemmed largely from a crippled and crippling family—unlike the average black family and unlike the narrator’s.But singular as Pecola’s life was, I believed some aspects ofher woundability were lodged in all young girls. In exploringthe social and domestic aggression that could cause a childto literally fall apart, I mounted a series of rejections, someroutine, some exceptional, some monstrous, all the whiletrying hard to avoid complicity in the demonization processPecola was subjected to. That is, I did not want to dehuman-ize the characters who trashed Pecola and contributed to hercollapse.
One problem was centering the weight of the novel’s
inquiry on so delicate and vulnerable a character could smashher and lead readers into the comfort of pitying her ratherthan into an interrogation of themselves for the smashing. My solution—break the narrative into parts that had to bereassembled by the reader—seemed to me a good idea, theexecution of which does not satisfy me now. Besides, it didn’twork: many readers remain touched but not moved.
The other problem, of course, was language. Holding the
despising glance while sabotaging it was difﬁcult. The noveltried to hit the raw nerve of racial self-contempt, expose it,then soothe it not with narcotics but with language thatreplicated the agency I discovered in my ﬁrst experience ofbeauty. Because that moment was so racially infused (myrevulsion at what my school friend wanted: very blue eyes ina very black skin; the harm she was doing to myconcept of
the beautiful), the struggle was for writing that was indis-putably black. I don’t yet know quite what that is, but nei-ther that nor the attempts to disqualify an effort to ﬁnd outkeeps me from trying to pursue it.ForewordMy choices of language (speakerly, aural, colloquial), my
reliance for full comprehension on codes embedded in blackculture, my effort to effect immediate coconspiracy and inti-macy (without any distancing, explanatory fabric), as well asmy attempt to shape a silence while breaking it are attemptsto transﬁgure the complexity and wealth of Black Americanculture into a language worthy of the culture.
Thinking back now on the problems expressive language
presented to me, I am amazed by their currency, their tenac-ity. Hearing “civilized” languages debase humans, watchingcultural exorcisms debase literature, seeing oneself preservedin the amber of disqualifying metaphors—I can say that mynarrative project is as difﬁcult today as it was then.xiiiThe Bluest EyeL
This book has been optimized for viewing at a monitor 
setting of 1024 ×768 pixels.Here is the house. It is green and white. It has a red door. It is
very pretty. Here is the family. Mother, Father, Dick, andJane live in the green-and-white house. They are veryhappy. See Jane. She has a red dress. She wants to play. Whowill play with Jane? See the cat. It goes meow-meow. Comeand play. Come play with Jane. The kitten will not play. SeeMother. Mother is very nice. Mother, will you play withJane? Mother laughs. Laugh, Mother, laugh. See Father. Heis big and strong. Father, will you play with Jane? Father issmiling. Smile, Father, smile. See the dog. Bowwow goes
the dog. Do you want to play with Jane? See the dog run.
Run, dog, run. Look, look. Here comes a friend. The
friend will play with Jane. They will play a good game.Play, Jane, play.Here is the house it is green and white it has a red door it
is very pretty here is the family mother father dick andjane live in the green-and-white house they are very happysee jane she has a red dress she wants to play who will playwith jane see the cat it goes meow-meow come and playcome play with jane the kitten will not play see mothermother is very nice mother will you play with jane motherlaughs laugh mother laugh see father he is big and strongfather will you play with jane father is smiling smile fathersmile see the dog bowwow goes the dog do you want toplay do you want to play with jane see the dog run rundog run look look here comes a friend the friend will playwith jane they will play a good game play jane playHereisthehouseitisgreenandwhiteithasareddooritisveryprettyhereisthefamilymotherfatherdickandjaneliveinthegreenandwhitehousetheyareveryhappyseejaneshehasareddressshewantstoplaywhowillplaywithjaneseethecatitgoesmeowmeowcomeandplaycomeplaywithjanethekittenwillnotplayseemothermotherisverynicemotherwillyouplaywithjanemotherlaughslaughmotherlaughseefatherheisbigandstrongfatherwillyouplaywithjanefatherissmilingsmilefathersmileseethedogbowwowgoesthedogdoyouwanttoplaydoyouwanttoplaywithjaneseethedogrunrundogrunlooklookherecomesafriendthefriendwillplaywithjanetheywillplayagoodgameplayjaneplayThe Bluest EyeQuiet as it’s kept, there were no marigolds in the fall of
1941. We thought, at the time, that it was because Pecolawas having her father’s baby that the marigolds did notgrow. A little examination and much less melancholy wouldhave proved to us that our seeds were not the only ones thatdid not sprout; nobody’s did. Not even the gardens frontingthe lake showed marigolds that year. But so deeply con-cerned were we with the health and safe delivery of Pecola’sbaby we could think of nothing but our own magic: if weplanted the seeds, and said the right words over them, theywould blossom, and everything would be all right.
It was a long time before my sister and I admitted to 
ourselves that no green was going to spring from our seeds.Once we knew, our guilt was relieved only by ﬁghts andmutual accusations about who was to blame. For years Ithought my sister was right: it was my fault. I had plantedthem too far down in the earth. It never occurred to eitherof us that the earth itself might have been unyielding. Wehad dropped our seeds in our own little plot of black dirt
just as Pecola’s father had dropped his seeds in his own plotof black dirt. Our innocence and faith were no more pro-ductive than his lust or despair. What is clear now is that ofall of that hope, fear, lust, love, and grief, nothing remainsbut Pecola and the unyielding earth. Cholly Breedlove isdead; our innocence too. The seeds shriveled and died; herbaby too.
There is really nothing more to say—except why. But
since why is difﬁcult to handle, one must take refuge in how.The Bluest EyeAutumn
LNuns go by as quiet as lust, and drunken men and sober
eyes sing in the lobby of the Greek hotel. RosemaryVillanucci, our next-door friend who lives above herfather’s café, sits in a 1939 Buick eating bread and butter.
She rolls down the window to tell my sister Frieda andme that we can’t come in. We stare at her, wanting herbread, but more than that wanting to poke the arroganceout of her eyes and smash the pride of ownership thatcurls her chewing mouth. When she comes out of the carwe will beat her up, make red marks on her white skin,and she will cry and ask us do we want her to pull herpants down. We will say no. We don’t know what weshould feel or do if she does, but whenever she asks us,we know she is offering us something precious and thatour own pride must be asserted by refusing to accept.
School has started, and Frieda and I get new brown
stockings and cod-liver oil. Grown-ups talk in tired, edgyvoices about Zick’s Coal Company and take us along in the evening to the railroad tracks where we ﬁll burlap
sacks with the tiny pieces of coal lying about. Later wewalk home, glancing back to see the great carloads ofslag being dumped, red hot and smoking, into the ravinethat skirts the steel mill. The dying ﬁre lights the sky witha dull orange glow. Frieda and I lag behind, staring at thepatch of color surrounded by black. It is impossible notto feel a shiver when our feet leave the gravel path andsink into the dead grass in the ﬁeld.
Our house is old, cold, and green. At night a kerosene
lamp lights one large room. The others are braced indarkness, peopled by roaches and mice. Adults do nottalk to us—they give us directions. They issue orderswithout providing information. When we trip and falldown they glance at us; if we cut or bruise ourselves, theyask us are we crazy. When we catch colds, they shaketheir heads in disgust at our lack of consideration. How,they ask us, do you expect anybody to get anything doneif you all are sick? We cannot answer them. Our illness istreated with contempt, foul Black Draught, and castor oilthat blunts our minds.
When, on a day after a trip to collect coal, I cough
once, loudly, through bronchial tubes already packedtight with phlegm, my mother frowns. “Great Jesus. Geton in that bed. How many times do I have to tell you towear something on your head? You must be the biggestfool in this town. Frieda? Get some rags and stuff thatwindow.”
Frieda restuffs the window. I trudge off to bed, full of
guilt and self-pity. I lie down in my underwear, the metalin my black garters hurts my legs, but I do not take themoff, for it is too cold to lie stockingless. It takes a longThe Bluest Eyetime for my body to heat its place in the bed. Once I have
generated a silhouette of warmth, I dare not move, forthere is a cold place one-half inch in any direction. Noone speaks to me or asks how I feel. In an hour or twomy mother comes. Her hands are large and rough, andwhen she rubs the Vicks salve on my chest, I am rigidwith pain. She takes two ﬁngers’ full of it at a time, andmassages my chest until I am faint. Just when I think Iwill tip over into a scream, she scoops out a little of thesalve on her foreﬁnger and puts it in my mouth, tellingme to swallow. A hot ﬂannel is wrapped about my neckand chest. I am covered up with heavy quilts and orderedto sweat, which I do—promptly.
Later I throw up, and my mother says, “What did you
puke on the bed clothes for? Don’t you have senseenough to hold your head out the bed? Now, look whatyou did. You think I got time for nothing but washing upyour puke?”
The puke swaddles down the pillow onto the sheet—
green-gray, with ﬂecks of orange. It moves like the insidesof an uncooked egg. Stubbornly clinging to its own mass,refusing to break up and be removed. How, I wonder, canit be so neat and nasty at the same time?
My mother’s voice drones on. She is not talking to me.
She is talking to the puke, but she is calling it my name:Claudia. She wipes it up as best she can and puts ascratchy towel over the large wet place. I lie down again.The rags have fallen from the window crack, and the airis cold. I dare not call her back and am reluctant to leavemy warmth. My mother’s anger humiliates me; her wordschafe my cheeks, and I am crying. I do not know that sheis not angry at me, but at my sickness. I believe she11despises my weakness for letting the sickness “take holt.”
By and by I will not get sick; I will refuse to. But for nowI am crying. I know I am making more snot, but I can’tstop.
My sister comes in. Her eyes are full of sorrow. She
sings to me: “When the deep purple falls over sleepygarden walls, someone thinks of m e.... ”  I  doze,
thinking of plums, walls, and “someone.”
But was it really like that? As painful as I remember?
Only mildly. Or rather, it was a productive andfructifying pain. Love, thick and dark as Alaga syrup,eased up into that cracked window. I could smell it—tasteit—sweet, musty, with an edge of wintergreen in itsbase—everywhere in that house. It stuck, along with mytongue, to the frosted windowpanes. It coated my chest,along with the salve, and when the ﬂannel came undonein my sleep, the clear, sharp curves of air outlined itspresence on my throat. And in the night, when mycoughing was dry and tough, feet padded into the room,hands repinned the ﬂannel, readjusted the quilt, andrested a moment on my forehead. So when I think ofautumn, I think of somebody with hands who does notwant me to die.
It was autumn too when Mr. Henry came. Our roomer.
Our roomer. The words ballooned from the lips andhovered about our heads—silent, separate, and pleasantlymysterious. My mother was all ease and satisfaction indiscussing his coming.
“You know him,” she said to her friends. “Henry
Washington. He’s been living over there with Miss DellaThe Bluest EyeJones on Thirteenth Street. But she’s too addled now to
keep up. So he’s looking for another place.”
“Oh, yes.” Her friends do not hide their curiosity. “I
been wondering how long he was going to stay up therewith her. They say she’s real bad off. Don’t know who heis half the time, and nobody else.”
“Well, that old crazy nigger she married up with didn’t
help her head none.”
“Did you hear what he told folks when he left her?”“Uh-uh. What?”“Well, he run off with that triﬂing Peggy—from Elyria.
You know.”
“One of Old Slack Bessie’s girls?”“That’s the one. Well, somebody asked him why he
left a nice good church woman like Della for that heifer.You know Della always did keep a good house. And hesaid the honest-to-God real reason was he couldn’t takeno more of that violet water Della Jones used. Said hewanted a woman to smell like a woman. Said Della wasjust too clean for him.”
“Old dog. Ain’t that nasty!”“You telling me. What kind of reasoning is that?”“No kind. Some men just dogs.”“Is that what give her them strokes?”“Must have helped. But you know, none of them girls
wasn’t too bright. Remember that grinning Hattie? Shewasn’t never right. And their Auntie Julia is still trottingup and down Sixteenth Street talking to herself.”
“Didn’t she get put away?”“Naw. County wouldn’t take her. Said she wasn’t
harming anybody.”
“Well, she’s harming me. You want something to scare13the living shit out of you, you get up at ﬁve-thirty in the
morning like I do and see that old hag ﬂoating by in thatbonnet. Have mercy!”
They laugh.Frieda and I are washing Mason jars. We do not hear
their words, but with grown-ups we listen to and watchout for their voices.
“Well, I hope don’t nobody let me roam around like
that when I get senile. It’s a shame.”
“What they going to do about Della? Don’t she have
no people?”
“A sister’s coming up from North Carolina to look
after her. I expect she wants to get aholt of Della’shouse.”
“Oh, come on. That’s a evil thought, if ever I heard
one.”
“What you want to bet? Henry Washington said that
sister ain’t seen Della in ﬁfteen years.”
“I kind of thought Henry would marry her one of
these days.”
“That old woman?”“Well, Henry ain’t no chicken.”“No, but he ain’t no buzzard, either.”“He ever been married to anybody?”“No.”“How come? Somebody cut it off?”“He’s just picky.”“He ain’t picky. You see anything around here you’d
marry?”
“Well . . . no.”“He’s just sensible. A steady worker with quiet ways. I
hope it works out all right.”The Bluest Eye“It will. How much you charging?”
“Five dollars every two weeks.”“That’ll be a big help to you.”“I’ll say.”
Their conversation is like a gently wicked dance: sound
meets sound, curtsies, shimmies, and retires. Anothersound enters but is upstaged by still another: the twocircle each other and stop. Sometimes their words movein lofty spirals; other times they take strident leaps, andall of it is punctuated with warm-pulsed laughter—likethe throb of a heart made of jelly. The edge, the curl, thethrust of their emotions is always clear to Frieda and me.We do not, cannot, know the meanings of all their words,for we are nine and ten years old. So we watch theirfaces, their hands, their feet, and listen for truth intimbre.
So when Mr. Henry arrived on a Saturday night, we
smelled him. He smelled wonderful. Like trees and lemonvanishing cream, and Nu Nile Hair Oil and ﬂecks of Sen-Sen.
He smiled a lot, showing small even teeth with a
friendly gap in the middle. Frieda and I were notintroduced to him—merely pointed out. Like, here is thebathroom; the clothes closet is here; and these are mykids, Frieda and Claudia; watch out for this window; itdon’t open all the way.
We looked sideways at him, saying nothing and
expecting him to say nothing. Just to nod, as he had doneat the clothes closet, acknowledging our existence. To oursurprise, he spoke to us.15“Hello there. You must be Greta Garbo, and you must
be Ginger Rogers.”
We giggled. Even my father was startled into a smile.“Want a penny?” He held out a shiny coin to us.
Frieda lowered her head, too pleased to answer. I reachedfor it. He snapped his thumb and foreﬁnger, and thepenny disappeared. Our shock was laced with delight.We searched all over him, poking our ﬁngers into hissocks, looking up the inside back of his coat. If happinessis anticipation with certainty, we were happy. And whilewe waited for the coin to reappear, we knew we wereamusing Mama and Daddy. Daddy was smiling, andMama’s eyes went soft as they followed our handswandering over Mr. Henry’s body.
We loved him. Even after what came later, there was
no bitterness in our memory of him.
She slept in the bed with us. Frieda on the outside
because she is brave—it never occurs to her that if in hersleep her hand hangs over the edge of the bed“something” will crawl out from under it and bite herﬁngers off. I sleep near the wall because that thought has
occurred to me. Pecola, therefore, had to sleep in themiddle.
Mama had told us two days earlier that a “case” was
coming—a girl who had no place to go. The county hadplaced her in our house for a few days until they coulddecide what to do, or, more precisely, until the family was reunited. We were to be nice to her and not ﬁght.Mama didn’t know “what got into people,” but that oldThe Bluest EyeDog Breedlove had burned up his house, gone upside his
wife’s head, and everybody, as a result, was outdoors.
Outdoors, we knew, was the real terror of life. The
threat of being outdoors surfaced frequently in thosedays. Every possibility of excess was curtailed with it. Ifsomebody ate too much, he could end up outdoors. Ifsomebody used too much coal, he could end up outdoors.
People could gamble themselves outdoors, drinkthemselves outdoors. Sometimes mothers put their sonsoutdoors, and when that happened, regardless of whatthe son had done, all sympathy was with him. He wasoutdoors, and his own ﬂesh had done it. To be putoutdoors by a landlord was one thing—unfortunate, butan aspect of life over which you had no control, since you could not control your income. But to be slackenough to put oneself outdoors, or heartless enough toput one’s own kin outdoors—that was criminal.
There is a difference between being put outand being
put out doors. If you are put out, you go somewhere else;
if you are outdoors, there is no place to go. Thedistinction was subtle but ﬁnal. Outdoors was the end ofsomething, an irrevocable, physical fact, deﬁning andcomplementing our metaphysical condition. Being aminority in both caste and class, we moved aboutanyway on the hem of life, struggling to consolidate ourweaknesses and hang on, or to creep singly up into themajor folds of the garment. Our peripheral existence,however, was something we had learned to deal with—probably because it was abstract. But theconcreteness of being outdoors was another matter—likethe difference between the concept of death and being, in17fact, dead. Dead doesn’t change, and outdoors is here to
stay.
Knowing that there was such a thing as outdoors bred
in us a hunger for property, for ownership. The ﬁrmpossession of a yard, a porch, a grape arbor. Propertiedblack people spent all their energies, all their love, on theirnests. Like frenzied, desperate birds, they overdecoratedeverything; fussed and ﬁdgeted over their hard-wonhomes; canned, jellied, and preserved all summer to ﬁll thecupboards and shelves; they painted, picked, and poked atevery corner of their houses. And these houses loomedlike hothouse sunﬂowers among the rows of weeds thatwere the rented houses. Renting blacks cast furtive glancesat these owned yards and porches, and made ﬁrmercommitments to buy themselves “some nice little oldplace.” In the meantime, they saved, and scratched, andpiled away what they could in the rented hovels, lookingforward to the day of property.
Cholly Breedlove, then, a renting black, having put his
family outdoors, had catapulted himself beyond thereaches of human consideration. He had joined theanimals; was, indeed, an old dog, a snake, a ratty nigger.Mrs. Breedlove was staying with the woman she workedfor; the boy, Sammy, was with some other family; andPecola was to stay with us. Cholly was in jail.
She came with nothing. No little paper bag with the
other dress, or a nightgown, or two pair of whitishcotton bloomers. She just appeared with a white womanand sat down.
We had fun in those few days Pecola was with us.
Frieda and I stopped ﬁghting each other and concentratedThe Bluest Eyeon our guest, trying hard to keep her from feeling
outdoors.
When we discovered that she clearly did not want to
dominate us, we liked her. She laughed when I clownedfor her, and smiled and accepted gracefully the food giftsmy sister gave her.
“Would you like some graham crackers?”“I don’t care.”Frieda brought her four graham crackers on a saucer
and some milk in a blue-and-white Shirley Temple cup.She was a long time with the milk, and gazed fondly atthe silhouette of Shirley Temple’s dimpled face. Friedaand she had a loving conversation about how cu-uteShirley Temple was. I couldn’t join them in theiradoration because I hated Shirley. Not because she wascute, but because she danced with Bojangles, who wasmyfriend, myuncle, mydaddy, and who ought to have
been soft-shoeing it and chuckling with me. Instead hewas enjoying, sharing, giving a lovely dance thing withone of those little white girls whose socks never slid down under their heels. So I said, “I like Jane Withers.”
They gave me a puzzled look, decided I was
incomprehensible, and continued their reminiscing aboutold squint-eyed Shirley.
Younger than both Frieda and Pecola, I had not yet
arrived at the turning point in the development of mypsyche which would allow me to love her. What I felt atthat time was unsullied hatred. But before that I had felta stranger, more frightening thing than hatred for all theShirley Temples of the world.
It had begun with Christmas and the gift of dolls. The19big, the special, the loving gift was always a big, blue-
eyed Baby Doll. From the clucking sounds of adults Iknew that the doll represented what they thought was myfondest wish. I was bemused with the thing itself, and theway it looked. What was I supposed to do with it?Pretend I was its mother? I had no interest in babies orthe concept of motherhood. I was interested only inhumans my own age and size, and could not generate anyenthusiasm at the prospect of being a mother.Motherhood was old age, and other remote possibilities.I learned quickly, however, what I was expected to dowith the doll: rock it, fabricate storied situations aroundit, even sleep with it. Picture books were full of little girlssleeping with their dolls. Raggedy Ann dolls usually, butthey were out of the question. I was physically revoltedby and secretly frightened of those round moronic eyes,the pancake face, and orangeworms hair.
The other dolls, which were supposed to bring me
great pleasure, succeeded in doing quite the opposite.When I took it to bed, its hard unyielding limbs resistedmy ﬂesh—the tapered ﬁngertips on those dimpled handsscratched. If, in sleep, I turned, the bone-cold headcollided with my own. It was a most uncomfortable,patently aggressive sleeping companion. To hold it wasno more rewarding. The starched gauze or lace on thecotton dress irritated any embrace. I had only one desire:to dismember it. To see of what it was made, to discoverthe dearness, to ﬁnd the beauty, the desirability that hadescaped me, but apparently only me. Adults, older girls,shops, magazines, newspapers, window signs—all theworld had agreed that a blue-eyed, yellow-haired, pink-skinned doll was what every girl child treasured.The Bluest Eye“Here,” they said, “this is beautiful, and if you are on
this day ‘worthy’ you may have it.” I ﬁngered the face,wondering at the single-stroke eyebrows; picked at thepearly teeth stuck like two piano keys between redbowline lips. Traced the turned-up nose, poked the glassyblue eyeballs, twisted the yellow hair. I could not love it.But I could examine it to see what it was that all theworld said was lovable. Break off the tiny ﬁngers, bendthe ﬂat feet, loosen the hair, twist the head around, andthe thing made one sound—a sound they said was thesweet and plaintive cry “Mama,” but which sounded tome like the bleat of a dying lamb, or, more precisely, ouricebox door opening on rusty hinges in July. Remove thecold and stupid eyeball, it would bleat still, “Ahhhhhh,”take off the head, shake out the sawdust, crack the backagainst the brass bed rail, it would bleat still. The gauzeback would split, and I could see the disk with six holes,the secret of the sound. A mere metal roundness.
Grown people frowned and fussed: “You-don’t-know-
how-to-take-care-of-nothing. I-never-had-a-baby-doll-in-my-whole-life-and-used-to-cry-my-eyes-out-for-them.Now-you-got-one-a-beautiful-one-and-you-tear-it-up-what’s-the-matter-with-you?”
How strong was their outrage. Tears threatened to
erase the aloofness of their authority. The emotion ofyears of unfulﬁlled longing preened in their voices. I didnot know why I destroyed those dolls. But I did knowthat nobody ever asked me what I wanted for Christmas.Had any adult with the power to fulﬁll my desires takenme seriously and asked me what I wanted, they wouldhave known that I did not want to have anything to own,or to possess any object. I wanted rather to feel21something on Christmas day. The real question would
have been, “Dear Claudia, what experience would youlike on Christmas?” I could have spoken up, “I want tosit on the low stool in Big Mama’s kitchen with my lapfull of lilacs and listen to Big Papa play his violin for mealone.” The lowness of the stool made for my body, thesecurity and warmth of Big Mama’s kitchen, the smell ofthe lilacs, the sound of the music, and, since it would begood to have all of my senses engaged, the taste of apeach, perhaps, afterward.
Instead I tasted and smelled the acridness of tin plates
and cups designed for tea parties that bored me. Instead Ilooked with loathing on new dresses that required ahateful bath in a galvanized zinc tub before wearing.Slipping around on the zinc, no time to play or soak, forthe water chilled too fast, no time to enjoy one’snakedness, only time to make curtains of soapy watercareen down between the legs. Then the scratchy towelsand the dreadful and humiliating absence of dirt. Theirritable, unimaginative cleanliness. Gone the ink marksfrom legs and face, all my creations and accumulations ofthe day gone, and replaced by goose pimples.
I destroyed white baby dolls.But the dismembering of dolls was not the true horror.
The truly horrifying thing was the transference of thesame impulses to little white girls. The indifference withwhich I could have axed them was shaken only by mydesire to do so. To discover what eluded me: the secret ofthe magic they weaved on others. What made peoplelook at them and say, “Awwwww,” but not for me? Theeye slide of black women as they approached them on theThe Bluest Eyestreet, and the possessive gentleness of their touch as they
handled them.
If I pinched them, their eyes—unlike the crazed glint of
the baby doll’s eyes—would fold in pain, and their crywould not be the sound of an icebox door, but afascinating cry of pain. When I learned how repulsive thisdisinterested violence was, that it was repulsive because itwas disinterested, my shame ﬂoundered about for refuge.The best hiding place was love. Thus the conversion frompristine sadism to fabricated hatred, to fraudulent love. Itwas a small step to Shirley Temple. I learned much laterto worship her, just as I learned to delight in cleanliness,knowing, even as I learned, that the change wasadjustment without improvement.
“Three quarts of milk. That’s what was inthat icebox
yesterday. Three whole quarts. Now they ain’t none. Nota drop. I don’t mind folks coming in and getting whatthey want, but three quarts of milk! What the devil doesanybody need with three quarts of milk?”
The “folks” my mother was referring to was Pecola.
The three of us, Pecola, Frieda, and I, listened to herdownstairs in the kitchen fussing about the amount ofmilk Pecola had drunk. We knew she was fond of theShirley Temple cup and took every opportunity to drinkmilk out of it just to handle and see sweet Shirley’s face.My mother knew that Frieda and I hated milk andassumed Pecola drank it out of greediness. It wascertainly not for us to “dispute” her. We didn’t initiatetalk with grown-ups; we answered their questions.23Ashamed of the insults that were being heaped on our
friend, we just sat there: I picked toe jam, Frieda cleanedher ﬁngernails with her teeth, and Pecola ﬁnger-tracedsome scars on her knee—her head cocked to one side. Mymother’s fussing soliloquies always irritated anddepressed us. They were interminable, insulting, andalthough indirect (Mama never named anybody—justtalked about folks and some people), extremely painful in
their thrust. She would go on like that for hours,connecting one offense to another until all of the thingsthat chagrined her were spewed out. Then, having toldeverybody and everything off, she would burst into songand sing the rest of the day. But it was such a long timebefore the singing part came. In the meantime, ourstomachs jellying and our necks burning, we listened,avoided each other’s eyes, and picked toe jam orwhatever.
“...I  don’t know what I’m suppose to be running
here, a charity ward, I guess. Time for me to get out ofthe giving line and get in the getting line. I guess I ain’t
supposed to have nothing. I’m sup posed to end up in the
poorhouse. Look like nothing I do is going to keep meout of there. Folks just spend all their time trying toﬁgure out ways to send meto the poorhouse. I got about
as much business with another mouth to feed as a cat haswith side pockets. As if I don’t have trouble enoughtrying to feed my own and keep out the poorhouse, now I got something else in here that’s just going to drink me
on in there. Well, naw, she ain’t. Not long as I gotstrength in my body and a tongue in my head. There’s alimit to everything. I ain’t got nothing to just throw away. Don’t nobody need three quarts of milk. HenryThe Bluest EyeFord don’t need three quarts of milk. That’s just
downright sinful. I’m willing to do what I can for folks.
Can’t nobody say I ain’t. But this has got to stop, and I’mjust the one to stop it. Bible say watch as wellas pray.
Folks just dump they children off on you and go on ’boutthey business. Ain’t nobody even peeped in here to see
whether that child has a loaf of bread. Look like theywould just peep in to see whether I had a loaf of bread to
give her. But naw. That thought don’t cross they mind.That old triﬂing Cholly been out of jail twowhole days
and ain’t been here yetto see if his own child was ’live or
dead. She could be dead for all he know. And that mama
neither. What kind of something is that?”
When Mama got around to Henry Ford and all those
people who didn’t care whether she had a loaf of bread, itwas time to go. We wanted to miss the part aboutRoosevelt and the CCC camps.
Frieda got up and started down the stairs. Pecola and I
followed, making a wide arc to avoid the kitchendoorway. We sat on the steps of the porch, where mymother’s words could reach us only in spurts.
It was a lonesome Saturday. The house smelled of Fels
Naphtha and the sharp odor of mustard greens cooking.Saturdays were lonesome, fussy, soapy days. Second inmisery only to those tight, starchy, cough-drop Sundays,so full of “don’ts” and “set’cha self downs.”
If my mother was in a singing mood, it wasn’t so bad.
She would sing about hard times, bad times, andsomebody-done-gone-and-left-me times. But her voicewas so sweet and her singing-eyes so melty I found myselflonging for those hard times, yearning to be grownwithout “a thin di-i-ime to my name.” I looked forward25to the delicious time when “my man” would leave me,
when I would “hate to see that evening sun godown ...”  ’cause then I would know “my man has left
this town.” Misery colored by the greens and blues in mymother’s voice took all of the grief out of the words andleft me with a conviction that pain was not onlyendurable, it was sweet.
But without song, those Saturdays sat on my head like
a coal scuttle, and if Mama was fussing, as she was now,it was like somebody throwing stones at it.
“ . . . and here I am poor as a bowl of yak-me. What
do they think I am? Some kind of Sandy Claus? Well,they can just take they stocking down ’cause it ain’t
Christmas ...”
We ﬁdgeted.“Let’s do something,” Frieda said.“What do you want to do?” I asked.“I don’t know. Nothing.” Frieda stared at the tops of
the trees. Pecola looked at her feet.
“You want to go up to Mr. Henry’s room and look at
his girlie magazines?”
Frieda made an ugly face. She didn’t like to look at
dirty pictures. “Well,” I continued, “we could look at hisBible. That’s pretty.” Frieda sucked her teeth and made a
phttt sound with her lips. “O.K., then. We could go
thread needles for the half-blind lady. She’ll give us apenny.”
Frieda snorted. “Her eyes look like snot. I don’t feel
like looking at them. What youwant to do, Pecola?”
“I don’t care,” she said. “Anything you want.”I had another idea. “We could go up the alley and see
what’s in the trash cans.”The Bluest Eye“Too cold,” said Frieda. She was bored and irritable.
“I know. We could make some fudge.”“You kidding? With Mama in there fussing? When she
starts fussing at the walls, you know she’s gonna be at itall day. She wouldn’t even let us.”
“Well, let’s go over to the Greek hotel and listen to
them cuss.”
“Oh, who wants to do that? Besides, they say the same
old words all the time.”
My supply of ideas exhausted, I began to concentrate
on the white spots on my ﬁngernails. The total signiﬁedthe number of boyfriends I would have. Seven.
Mama’s soliloquy slid into the silence “... Bible say
feed the hungry. That’s ﬁne. That’s all right. But I ain’tfeeding no elephant s....  Anybody need three quarts of
milk to liveneed to get out of here. They in the wrong
place. What is this? Some kind of dairy farm?”
Suddenly Pecola bolted straight up, her eyes wide with
terror. A whinnying sound came from her mouth.
“What’s the matter with you?” Frieda stood up too.
Then we both looked where Pecola was staring. Blood
was running down her legs. Some drops were on thesteps. I leaped up. “Hey. You cut yourself? Look. It’s allover your dress.”
A brownish-red stain discolored the back of her dress.
She kept whinnying, standing with her legs far apart.
Frieda said, “Oh. Lordy! I know. I know what that
is!”
“What?” Pecola’s ﬁngers went to her mouth.“That’s ministratin’.”“What’s that?”“You know.”27“Am I going to die?” she asked.
“Noooo. You won’t die. It just means you can have a
baby!”
“What?”“How do youknow?” I was sick and tired of Frieda
knowing everything.
“Mildred told me, and Mama too.”“I don’t believe it.”“You don’t have to, dummy. Look. Wait here. Sit
down, Pecola. Right here.” Frieda was all authority andzest. “And you,” she said to me, “you go get somewater.”
“Water?”“Yes, stupid. Water. And be quiet, or Mama will hear
you.”
Pecola sat down again, a little less fear in her eyes. I
went into the kitchen.
“What you want, girl?” Mama was rinsing curtains in
the sink.
“Some water, ma’am.”“Right where I’m working, naturally. Well, get a glass.
Not no clean one neither. Use that jar.”
I got a Mason jar and ﬁlled it with water from the
faucet. It seemed a long time ﬁlling.
“Don’t nobody never want nothing till they see me at
the sink. Then everybody got to drink wate r...”
When the jar was full, I moved to leave the room.“Where you going?”“Outside.”“Drink that water right here!”“I ain’t gonna break nothing.”“You don’t know what you gonna do.”The Bluest Eye“Yes, ma’am. I do. Lemme take it out. I won’t spill
none.”
“You bed’ not.”I got to the porch and stood there with the Mason jar
of water. Pecola was crying.
“What you crying for? Does it hurt?”She shook her head.“Then stop slinging snot.”Frieda opened the back door. She had something
tucked in her blouse. She looked at me in amazement andpointed to the jar. “What’s that supposed to do?”
“You told me. You saidget some water.”
“Not a little old jar full. Lots of water. To scrub the
steps with, dumbbell!”
“How was I supposed to know?”“Yeah. How was you. Come on.” She pulled Pecola up
by the arm. “Let’s go back here.” They headed for theside of the house where the bushes were thick.
“Hey. What about me? I want to go.”“Shut uuuup,” Frieda stage-whispered. “Mama will
hear you. You wash the steps.”
They disappeared around the corner of the house.I was going to miss something. Again. Here was
something important, and I had to stay behind and notsee any of it. I poured the water on the steps, sloshed itwith my shoe, and ran to join them.
Frieda was on her knees; a white rectangle of cotton
was near her on the ground. She was pulling Pecola’spants off. “Come on. Step out of them.” She managed toget the soiled pants down and ﬂung them at me. “Here.”
“What am I supposed to do with these?”“Bury them, moron.”29Frieda told Pecola to hold the cotton thing between
her legs.
“How she gonna walk like that?” I asked.Frieda didn’t answer. Instead she took two safety pins
from the hem of her skirt and began to pin the ends ofthe napkin to Pecola’s dress.
I picked up the pants with two ﬁngers and looked
about for something to dig a hole with. A rustling noisein the bushes startled me, and turning toward it, I saw apair of fascinated eyes in a dough-white face. Rosemarywas watching us. I grabbed for her face and succeeded inscratching her nose. She screamed and jumped back.
“Mrs. MacTeer! Mrs. MacTeer!” Rosemary hollered.
“Frieda and Claudia are out here playing nasty! Mrs.MacTeer!”
Mama opened the window and looked down at us.“What?”“They’re playing nasty, Mrs. MacTeer. Look. And
Claudia hit me ’cause I seen them!”
Mama slammed the window shut and came running
out the back door.
“What you all doing? Oh. Uh-huh. Uh-huh. Playing
nasty, huh?” She reached into the bushes and pulled off aswitch. “I’d rather raise pigs than some nasty girls. LeastI can slaughter them! ”
We began to shriek. “No, Mama. No, ma’am. We
wasn’t! She’s a liar! No, ma’am, Mama! No, ma’am,Mama!”
Mama grabbed Frieda by the shoulder, turned her
around, and gave her three or four stinging cuts on herlegs. “Gonna be nasty, huh? Naw you ain’t!”The Bluest EyeFrieda was destroyed. Whippings wounded and
insulted her.
Mama looked at Pecola. “You too!” she said. “Child
of mine or not!” She grabbed Pecola and spun heraround. The safety pin snapped open on one end of thenapkin, and Mama saw it fall from under her dress. Theswitch hovered in the air while Mama blinked. “Whatthe devil is going on here?”
Frieda was sobbing. I, next in line, began to explain.
“She was bleeding. We was just trying to stop theblood!”
Mama looked at Frieda for veriﬁcation. Frieda
nodded. “She’s ministratin’. We was just helping.”
Mama released Pecola and stood looking at her. Then
she pulled both of them toward her, their heads againsther stomach. Her eyes were sorry. “All right, all right.Now, stop crying. I didn’t know. Come on, now. Get onin the house. Go on home, Rosemary. The show isover.”
We trooped in, Frieda sobbing quietly, Pecola carrying
a white tail, me carrying the little-girl-gone-to-womanpants.
Mama led us to the bathroom. She prodded Pecola
inside, and taking the underwear from me, told us to stayout.
We could hear water running into the bathtub.“You think she’s going to drown her?”“Oh, Claudia. You so dumb. She’s just going to wash
her clothes and all.”
“Should we beat up Rosemary?”“No. Leave her alone.”31The water gushed, and over its gushing we could hear
the music of my mother’s laughter.
That night, in bed, the three of us lay still. We were full of
awe and respect for Pecola. Lying next to a real personwho was really ministratin’ was somehow sacred. Shewas different from us now—grown-up-like. She, herself,felt the distance, but refused to lord it over us.
After a long while she spoke very softly. “Is it true that
I can have a baby now?”
“Sure,” said Frieda drowsily. “Sure you can.”“But . . . how?” Her voice was hollow with wonder.
“Oh,” said Frieda, “somebody has to love you.”“Oh.”There was a long pause in which Pecola and I thought
this over. It would involve, I supposed, “my man,” who,before leaving me, would love me. But there weren’t anybabies in the songs my mother sang. Maybe that’s whythe women were sad: the men left before they could makea baby.
Then Pecola asked a question that had never entered
my mind. “How do you do that? I mean, how do you getsomebody to love you?” But Frieda was asleep. And Ididn’t know.The Bluest EyeHEREISTHEHOUSEITISGREENANDWH
ITEITHASAREDDOORITISVERYPRETTYITISVERYPRETTYPRETTYPRETTYP
There is an abandoned store on the southeast corner of
Broadway and Thirty-ﬁfth Street in Lorain, Ohio. It doesnot recede into its background of leaden sky, nor harmonizewith the gray frame houses and black telephone polesaround it. Rather, it foists itself on the eye of the passerby ina manner that is both irritating and melancholy. Visitorswho drive to this tiny town wonder why it has not been torndown, while pedestrians, who are residents of the neighbor-hood, simply look away when they pass it.
At one time, when the building housed a pizza parlor,
people saw only slow-footed teen-aged boys huddled aboutthe corner. These young boys met there to feel their groins,smoke cigarettes, and plan mild outrages. The smoke fromtheir cigarettes they inhaled deeply, forcing it to ﬁll theirlungs, their hearts, their thighs, and keep at bay the shiveri-ness, the energy of their youth. They moved slowly, laughedslowly, but ﬂicked the ashes from their cigarettes too quickly too often, and exposed themselves, to those whowere interested, as novices to the habit. But long before the
sound of their lowing and the sight of their preening, thebuilding was leased to a Hungarian baker, modestly famousfor his brioche and poppy-seed rolls. Earlier than that, therewas a real-estate ofﬁce there, and even before that, somegypsies used it as a base of operations. The gypsy familygave the large plate-glass window as much distinction andcharacter as it ever had. The girls of the family took turns sit-ting between yards of velvet draperies and Oriental rugshanging at the windows. They looked out and occasionallysmiled, or winked, or beckoned—only occasionally. Mostlythey looked, their elaborate dresses, long-sleeved and long-skirted, hiding the nakedness that stood in their eyes.
So ﬂuid has the population in that area been, that proba-
bly no one remembers longer, longer ago, before the time ofthe gypsies and the time of the teen-agers when theBreedloves lived there, nestled together in the storefront.Festering together in the debris of a realtor’s whim. Theyslipped in and out of the box of peeling gray, making no stirin the neighborhood, no sound in the labor force, and nowave in the mayor’s ofﬁce. Each member of the family in hisown cell of consciousness, each making his own patchworkquilt of reality—collecting fragments of experience here,pieces of information there. From the tiny impressionsgleaned from one another, they created a sense of belongingand tried to make do with the way they found each other.
The plan of the living quarters was as unimaginative as a
ﬁrst-generation Greek landlord could contrive it to be. Thelarge “store” area was partitioned into two rooms bybeaverboard planks that did not reach to the ceiling. Therewas a living room, which the family called the front room,The Bluest Eyeand the bedroom, where all the living was done. In the front
room were two sofas, an upright piano, and a tiny artiﬁcialChristmas tree which had been there, decorated and dust-laden, for two years. The bedroom had three beds: a narrowiron bed for Sammy, fourteen years old, another for Pecola,eleven years old, and a double bed for Cholly and Mrs.Breedlove. In the center of the bedroom, for the even distri-bution of heat, stood a coal stove. Trunks, chairs, a smallend table, and a cardboard “wardrobe” closet were placedaround the walls. The kitchen was in the back of this apart-ment, a separate room. There were no bath facilities. Only a toilet bowl, inaccessible to the eye, if not the ear, of the tenants.
There is nothing more to say about the furnishings. They
were anything but describable, having been conceived, man-ufactured, shipped, and sold in various states of thoughtless-ness, greed, and indifference. The furniture had agedwithout ever having become familiar. People had owned it,but never known it. No one had lost a penny or a broochunder the cushions of either sofa and remembered the placeand time of the loss or the ﬁnding. No one had clucked andsaid, “But I hadit just a minute ago. I was sitting right there
talking to ...”  o r  “Here it is. It must have slipped down
while I was feeding the baby!” No one had given birth inone of the beds—or remembered with fondness the peeledpaint places, because that’s what the baby, when he learnedto pull himself up, used to pick loose. No thrifty child hadtucked a wad of gum under the table. No happy drunk—afriend of the family, with a fat neck, unmarried, you know,but God how he eats!—had sat at the piano and played“You Are My Sunshine.” No young girl had stared at the35tiny Christmas tree and remembered when she had deco-
rated it, or wondered if that blue ball was going to hold, or ifHE would ever come back to see it.
There were no memories among those pieces. Certainly
no memories to be cherished. Occasionally an item pro-voked a physical reaction: an increase of acid irritation in theupper intestinal tract, a light ﬂush of perspiration at the backof the neck as circumstances surrounding the piece of furni-ture were recalled. The sofa, for example. It had been pur-chased new, but the fabric had split straight across the backby the time it was delivered. The store would not take theresponsibility ....
“Looka here, buddy. It was O.K. when I put it on the
truck. The store can’t do anything about it once it’s on thetruck . . . .” Listerine and Lucky Strike breath.
“But I don’t want no tore couch if’n it’s bought new.”
Pleading eyes and tightened testicles.
“Tough shit, buddy. Your tough shit .... ”
You could hate a sofa, of course—that is, if you could
hate a sofa. But it didn’t matter. You still had to get together$4.80a month. If you had to pay $ 4.80a month for a sofa
that started off split, no good, and humiliating—youcouldn’t take any joy in owning it. And the joylessness stank,pervading everything. The stink of it kept you from paintingthe beaverboard walls; from getting a matching piece ofmaterial for the chair; even from sewing up the split, whichbecame a gash, which became a gaping chasm that exposedthe cheap frame and cheaper upholstery. It withheld therefreshment in a sleep slept on it. It imposed a furtiveness onthe loving done on it. Like a sore tooth that is not content tothrob in isolation, but must diffuse its own pain to otherparts of the body—making breathing difﬁcult, vision lim-The Bluest Eyeited, nerves unsettled, so a hated piece of furniture produces
a fretful malaise that asserts itself throughout the house andlimits the delight of things not related to it.
The only living thing in the Breedloves’ house was the coal
stove, which lived independently of everything and every-one, its ﬁre being “out,” “banked,” or “up” at its own dis-cretion, in spite of the fact that the family fed it and knew allthe details of its regimen: sprinkle, do not dump, not toom u c h....  The ﬁre seemed to live, go down, or die accord-
ing to its own schemata. In the morning, however, it alwayssaw ﬁt to die.37HEREISTHEFAMILYMOTHERFATHER
DICKANDJANETHEYLIVEINTHEGREENANDWHITEHOUSETHEYAREVERYH
The Breedloves did not live in a storefront because they were
having temporary difﬁculty adjusting to the cutbacks at theplant. They lived there because they were poor and black,and they stayed there because they believed they were ugly.Although their poverty was traditional and stultifying, itwas not unique. But their ugliness was unique. No one couldhave convinced them that they were not relentlessly andaggressively ugly. Except for the father, Cholly, whose ugli-ness (the result of despair, dissipation, and violence directedtoward petty things and weak people) was behavior, the restof the family—Mrs. Breedlove, Sammy Breedlove, andPecola Breedlove—wore their ugliness, put it on, so tospeak, although it did not belong to them. The eyes, thesmall eyes set closely together under narrow foreheads. Thelow, irregular hairlines, which seemed even more irregular incontrast to the straight, heavy eyebrows which nearly met.Keen but crooked noses, with insolent nostrils. They hadhigh cheekbones, and their ears turned forward. Shapely lipswhich called attention not to themselves but to the rest of the
face. You looked at them and wondered why they were sougly; you looked closely and could not ﬁnd the source. Thenyou realized that it came from conviction, their conviction. Itwas as though some mysterious all-knowing master hadgiven each one a cloak of ugliness to wear, and they had eachaccepted it without question. The master had said, “You areugly people.” They had looked about themselves and sawnothing to contradict the statement; saw, in fact, support forit leaning at them from every billboard, every movie, everyglance. “Yes,” they had said. “You are right.” And they tookthe ugliness in their hands, threw it as a mantle over them,and went about the world with it. Dealing with it eachaccording to his way. Mrs. Breedlove handled hers as anactor does a prop: for the articulation of character, for sup-port of a role she frequently imagined was hers—martyr-dom. Sammy used his as a weapon to cause others pain. Headjusted his behavior to it, chose his companions on thebasis of it: people who could be fascinated, even intimidatedby it. And Pecola. She hid behind hers. Concealed, veiled,eclipsed—peeping out from behind the shroud very seldom,and then only to yearn for the return of her mask.
This family, on a Saturday morning in October, began,
one by one, to stir out of their dreams of afﬂuence andvengeance into the anonymous misery of their storefront.
Mrs. Breedlove slipped noiselessly out of bed, put a sweater
on over her nightgown (which was an old day dress), andwalked toward the kitchen. Her one good foot made hard,bony sounds; the twisted one whispered on the linoleum. Inthe kitchen she made noises with doors, faucets, and pans.39The noises were hollow, but the threats they implied were
not. Pecola opened her eyes and lay staring at the dead coalstove. Cholly mumbled, thrashed about in the bed for aminute, and then was quiet.
Even from where Pecola lay, she could smell Cholly’s
whiskey. The noises in the kitchen became louder and lesshollow. There was direction and purpose in Mrs. Breedlove’smovements that had nothing to do with the preparation ofbreakfast. This awareness, supported by ample evidencefrom the past, made Pecola tighten her stomach muscles andration her breath.
Cholly had come home drunk. Unfortunately he had
been too drunk to quarrel, so the whole business would haveto erupt this morning. Because it had not taken place imme-diately, the oncoming ﬁght would lack spontaneity; it wouldbe calculated, uninspired, and deadly.
Mrs. Breedlove came swiftly into the room and stood at
the foot of the bed where Cholly lay.
“I need some coal in this house.”Cholly did not move.“Hear me?” Mrs. Breedlove jabbed Cholly’s foot.Cholly opened his eyes slowly. They were red and menac-
ing. With no exception, Cholly had the meanest eyes intown.
“Awwwwww, woman!”“I said I need some coal. It’s as cold as a witch’s tit in this
house. Your whiskey ass wouldn’t feel hellﬁre, but I’m cold.I got to do a lot of things, but I ain’t got to freeze.”
“Leave me ’lone.”“Not until you get me some coal. If working like a mule
don’t give me the right to be warm, what am I doing it for?You sure ain’t bringing in nothing. If it was left up to you,The Bluest Eyewe’d all be dead . . . .” Her voice was like an earache in the
brain. “ . . . If you think I’m going to wade out in the cold
and get it myself, you’d better think again.”
“I don’t give a shit how you get it.” A bubble of violence
burst in his throat.
“You going to get your drunk self out of that bed and get
me some coal or not?”
Silence.“Cholly!”Silence.“Don’t try me this morning, man. You say one more
word, and I’ll split you open!”
Silence.“All right. All right. But if I sneeze once, just once, God
help your butt!”
Sammy was awake now too, but pretending to be asleep.
Pecola still held her stomach muscles taut and conserved herbreath. They all knew that Mrs. Breedlove could have,would have, and had, gotten coal from the shed, or thatSammy or Pecola could be directed to get it. But the unquar-reled evening hung like the ﬁrst note of a dirge in sullenlyexpectant air. An escapade of drunkenness, no matter howroutine, had its own ceremonial close. The tiny, undistin-guished days that Mrs. Breedlove lived were identiﬁed,grouped, and classed by these quarrels. They gave substanceto the minutes and hours otherwise dim and unrecalled.They relieved the tiresomeness of poverty, gave grandeur tothe dead rooms. In these violent breaks in routine that werethemselves routine, she could display the style and imagina-tion of what she believed to be her own true self. To depriveher of these ﬁghts was to deprive her of all the zest and rea-sonableness of life. Cholly, by his habitual drunkenness and41orneriness, provided them both with the material they
needed to make their lives tolerable. Mrs. Breedlove consid-ered herself an upright and Christian woman, burdenedwith a no-count man, whom God wanted her to punish.(Cholly was beyond redemption, of course, and redemptionwas hardly the point—Mrs. Breedlove was not interested inChrist the Redeemer, but rather Christ the Judge.) Often shecould be heard discoursing with Jesus about Cholly, plead-ing with Him to help her “strike the bastard down from hispea-knuckle of pride.” And once when a drunken gesturecatapulted Cholly into the red-hot stove, she screamed, “Gethim, Jesus! Get him!” If Cholly had stopped drinking, shewould never have forgiven Jesus. She needed Cholly’s sinsdesperately. The lower he sank, the wilder and more irre-sponsible he became, the more splendid she and her taskbecame. In the name of Jesus.
No less did Cholly need her. She was one of the few things
abhorrent to him that he could touch and therefore hurt. Hepoured out on her the sum of all his inarticulate fury andaborted desires. Hating her, he could leave himself intact.When he was still very young, Cholly had been surprised insome bushes by two white men while he was newly butearnestly engaged in eliciting sexual pleasure from a littlecountry girl. The men had shone a ﬂashlight right on hisbehind. He had stopped, terriﬁed. They chuckled. The beamof the ﬂashlight did not move. “Go on,” they said. “Go onand ﬁnish. And, nigger, make it good.” The ﬂashlight didnot move. For some reason Cholly had not hated the whitemen; he hated, despised, the girl. Even a half-remembranceof this episode, along with myriad other humiliations,defeats, and emasculations, could stir him into ﬂights ofdepravity that surprised himself—but only himself.The Bluest EyeSomehow he could not astound. He could only be
astounded. So he gave that up, too.
Cholly and Mrs. Breedlove fought each other with a
darkly brutal formalism that was paralleled only by theirlovemaking. Tacitly they had agreed not to kill each other.He fought her the way a coward ﬁghts a man—with feet, thepalms of his hands, and teeth. She, in turn, fought back in apurely feminine way—with frying pans and pokers, andoccasionally a ﬂatiron would sail toward his head. They didnot talk, groan, or curse during these beatings. There wasonly the muted sound of falling things, and ﬂesh on unsur-prised ﬂesh.
There was a difference in the reaction of the children to
these battles. Sammy cursed for a while, or left the house, orthrew himself into the fray. He was known, by the time hewas fourteen, to have run away from home no less thantwenty-seven times. Once he got to Buffalo and stayed threemonths. His returns, whether by force or circumstance, weresullen. Pecola, on the other hand, restricted by youth andsex, experimented with methods of endurance. Though themethods varied, the pain was as consistent as it was deep.She struggled between an overwhelming desire that onewould kill the other, and a profound wish that she herselfcould die. Now she was whispering, “Don’t, Mrs.Breedlove. Don’t.” Pecola, like Sammy and Cholly, alwayscalled her mother Mrs. Breedlove.
“Don’t, Mrs. Breedlove. Don’t.”But Mrs. Breedlove did.By the grace, no doubt, of God, Mrs. Breedlove sneezed.
Just once.
She ran into the bedroom with a dishpan full of cold
water and threw it in Cholly’s face. He sat up, choking and43spitting. Naked and ashen, he leaped from the bed, and with
a ﬂying tackle, grabbed his wife around the waist, and theyhit the ﬂoor. Cholly picked her up and knocked her downwith the back of his hand. She fell in a sitting position, herback supported by Sammy’s bed frame. She had not let go ofthe dishpan, and began to hit at Cholly’s thighs and groinwith it. He put his foot in her chest, and she dropped thepan. Dropping to his knee, he struck her several times in theface, and she might have succumbed early had he not hit hishand against the metal bed frame when his wife ducked.Mrs. Breedlove took advantage of this momentary suspen-sion of blows and slipped out of his reach. Sammy, who hadwatched in silence their struggling at his bedside, suddenlybegan to hit his father about the head with both ﬁsts, shout-ing “You naked fuck!” over and over and over. Mrs.Breedlove, having snatched up the round, ﬂat stove lid, rantippy-toe to Cholly as he was pulling himself up from hisknees, and struck him two blows, knocking him right backinto the senselessness out of which she had provoked him.Panting, she threw a quilt over him and let him lie.
Sammy screamed, “Kill him! Kill him!”Mrs. Breedlove looked at Sammy with surprise. “Cut out
that noise, boy.” She put the stove lid back in place, andwalked toward the kitchen. At the doorway she paused longenough to say to her son, “Get up from there anyhow. I needsome coal.”
Letting herself breathe easy now, Pecola covered her head
with the quilt. The sick feeling, which she had tried to pre-vent by holding in her stomach, came quickly in spite of herThe Bluest Eyeprecaution. There surged in her the desire to heave, but as
always, she knew she would not.
“Please, God,” she whispered into the palm of her hand.
“Please make me disappear.” She squeezed her eyes shut.Little parts of her body faded away. Now slowly, now with arush. Slowly again. Her ﬁngers went, one by one; then herarms disappeared all the way to the elbow. Her feet now.Yes, that was good. The legs all at once. It was hardest abovethe thighs. She had to be real still and pull. Her stomachwould not go. But ﬁnally it, too, went away. Then her chest,her neck. The face was hard, too. Almost done, almost.Only her tight, tight eyes were left. They were always left.
Try as she might, she could never get her eyes to disap-
pear. So what was the point? They were everything.Everything was there, in them. All of those pictures, all ofthose faces. She had long ago given up the idea of runningaway to see new pictures, new faces, as Sammy had so oftendone. He never took her, and he never thought about hisgoing ahead of time, so it was never planned. It wouldn’thave worked anyway. As long as she looked the way she did,as long as she was ugly, she would have to stay with thesepeople. Somehow she belonged to them. Long hours she satlooking in the mirror, trying to discover the secret of the ugli-ness, the ugliness that made her ignored or despised atschool, by teachers and classmates alike. She was the onlymember of her class who sat alone at a double desk. The ﬁrstletter of her last name forced her to sit in the front of theroom always. But what about Marie Appolonaire? Mariewas in front of her, but she shared a desk with LukeAngelino. Her teachers had always treated her this way.They tried never to glance at her, and called on her only45when everyone was required to respond. She also knew that
when one of the girls at school wanted to be particularlyinsulting to a boy, or wanted to get an immediate responsefrom him, she could say. “Bobby loves Pecola Breedlove!Bobby loves Pecola Breedlove!” and never fail to get peals oflaughter from those in earshot, and mock anger from theaccused.
It had occurred to Pecola some time ago that if her eyes,
those eyes that held the pictures, and knew the sights—ifthose eyes of hers were different, that is to say, beautiful, sheherself would be different. Her teeth were good, and at leasther nose was not big and ﬂat like some of those who werethought so cute. If she looked different, beautiful, maybeCholly would be different, and Mrs. Breedlove too. Maybethey’d say, “Why, look at pretty-eyed Pecola. We mustn’t dobad things in front of those pretty eyes.”
Pretty eyes. Pretty blue eyes. Big blue pretty eyes.
Run, Jip, run. Jip runs, Alice runs. Alice has blue eyes.Jerry has blue eyes. Jerry runs. Alice runs. They runwith their blue eyes. Four blue eyes. Four prettyblue eyes. Blue-sky eyes. Blue-like Mrs. Forrest’sblue blouse eyes. Morning-glory-blue-eyes.Alice-and-Jerry-blue-storybook-eyes.
Each night, without fail, she prayed for blue eyes.
Fervently, for a year she had prayed. Although somewhatdiscouraged, she was not without hope. To have somethingas wonderful as that happen would take a long, long time.
Thrown, in this way, into the binding conviction that
only a miracle could relieve her, she would never know herThe Bluest Eyebeauty. She would see only what there was to see: the eyes of
other people.
She walks down Garden Avenue to a small grocery store
which sells penny candy. Three pennies are in her shoe—slipping back and forth between the sock and the inner sole.With each step she feels the painful press of the coins againsther foot. A sweet, endurable, even cherished irritation, fullof promise and delicate security. There is plenty of time toconsider what to buy. Now, however, she moves down anavenue gently buffeted by the familiar and therefore lovedimages. The dandelions at the base of the telephone pole.Why, she wonders, do people call them weeds? She thoughtthey were pretty. But grown-ups say, “Miss Dunion keepsher yard so nice. Not a dandelion anywhere.” Hunkiewomen in black babushkas go into the ﬁelds with baskets topull them up. But they do not want the yellow heads—onlythe jagged leaves. They make dandelion soup. Dandelionwine. Nobody loves the head of a dandelion. Maybebecause they are so many, strong, and soon.
There was the sidewalk crack shaped like a Y, and the
other one that lifted the concrete up from the dirt ﬂoor.Frequently her sloughing step had made her trip over thatone. Skates would go well over this sidewalk—old it was,and smooth; it made the wheels glide evenly, with a mildwhirr. The newly paved walks were bumpy and uncomfort-able, and the sound of skate wheels on new walks was grating.
These and other inanimate things she saw and experi-
enced. They were real to her. She knew them. They were thecodes and touchstones of the world, capable of translationand possession. She owned the crack that made her stumble;47she owned the clumps of dandelions whose white heads, last
fall, she had blown away; whose yellow heads, this fall, shepeered into. And owning them made her part of the world,and the world a part of her.
She climbs four wooden steps to the door of Yacobow-
ski’s Fresh Veg. Meat and Sundries Store. A bell tinkles asshe opens it. Standing before the counter, she looks at thearray of candies. All Mary Janes, she decides. Three for apenny. The resistant sweetness that breaks open at last todeliver peanut butter—the oil and salt which complementthe sweet pull of caramel. A peal of anticipation unsettles her stomach.
She pulls off her shoe and takes out the three pennies. The
gray head of Mr. Yacobowski looms up over the counter. Heurges his eyes out of his thoughts to encounter her. Blue eyes.Blear-dropped. Slowly, like Indian summer moving imper-ceptibly toward fall, he looks toward her. Somewherebetween retina and object, between vision and view, his eyesdraw back, hesitate, and hover. At some ﬁxed point in timeand space he senses that he need not waste the effort of aglance. He does not see her, because for him there is nothingto see. How can a ﬁfty-two-year-old white immigrant store-keeper with the taste of potatoes and beer in his mouth, hismind honed on the doe-eyed Virgin Mary, his sensibilitiesblunted by a permanent awareness of loss, seea little black
girl? Nothing in his life even suggested that the feat was pos-sible, not to say desirable or necessary.
“Yeah?”She looks up at him and sees the vacuum where curiosity
ought to lodge. And something more. The total absence ofhuman recognition—the glazed separateness. She does notknow what keeps his glance suspended. Perhaps because heThe Bluest Eyeis grown, or a man, and she a little girl. But she has seen
interest, disgust, even anger in grown male eyes. Yet thisvacuum is not new to her. It has an edge; somewhere in thebottom lid is the distaste. She has seen it lurking in the eyesof all white people. So. The distaste must be for her, herblackness. All things in her are ﬂux and anticipation. Buther blackness is static and dread. And it is the blackness thataccounts for, that creates, the vacuum edged with distaste inwhite eyes.
She points her ﬁnger at the Mary Janes—a little black
shaft of ﬁnger, its tip pressed on the display window. Thequietly inoffensive assertion of a black child’s attempt tocommunicate with a white adult.
“Them.” The word is more sigh than sense.“What? These? These?” Phlegm and impatience mingle
in his voice.
She shakes her head, her ﬁngertip ﬁxed on the spot
which, in her view, at any rate, identiﬁes the Mary Janes. Hecannot see her view—the angle of his vision, the slant of herﬁnger, makes it incomprehensible to him. His lumpy redhand plops around in the glass casing like the agitated headof a chicken outraged by the loss of its body.
“Christ. Kantcha talk?”His ﬁngers brush the Mary Janes.She nods.“Well, why’nt you say so? One? How many?”Pecola unfolds her ﬁst, showing the three pennies. He
scoots three Mary Janes toward her—three yellow rectan-gles in each packet. She holds the money toward him. Hehesitates, not wanting to touch her hand. She does not knowhow to move the ﬁnger of her right hand from the displaycounter or how to get the coins out of her left hand. Finally49he reaches over and takes the pennies from her hand. His
nails graze her damp palm.
Outside, Pecola feels the inexplicable shame ebb.Dandelions. A dart of affection leaps out from her to
them. But they do not look at her and do not send love back.She thinks, “They areugly. They areweeds.” Preoccupied
with that revelation, she trips on the sidewalk crack. Angerstirs and wakes in her; it opens its mouth, and like a hot-mouthed puppy, laps up the dredges of her shame.
Anger is better. There is a sense of being in anger. A real-
ity and presence. An awareness of worth. It is a lovely surg-ing. Her thoughts fall back to Mr. Yacobowski’s eyes, hisphlegmy voice. The anger will not hold; the puppy is too eas-ily surfeited. Its thirst too quickly quenched, it sleeps. Theshame wells up again, its muddy rivulets seeping into hereyes. What to do before the tears come. She remembers theMary Janes.
Each pale yellow wrapper has a picture on it. A picture of
little Mary Jane, for whom the candy is named. Smilingwhite face. Blond hair in gentle disarray, blue eyes looking ather out of a world of clean comfort. The eyes are petulant,mischievous. To Pecola they are simply pretty. She eats thecandy, and its sweetness is good. To eat the candy is some-how to eat the eyes, eat Mary Jane. Love Mary Jane. BeMary Jane.
Three pennies had bought her nine lovely orgasms with
Mary Jane. Lovely Mary Jane, for whom a candy is named.
Three whores lived in the apartment above the Breedloves’
storefront. China, Poland, and Miss Marie. Pecola lovedThe Bluest Eyethem, visited them, and ran their errands. They, in turn, did
not despise her.
On an October morning, the morning of the stove-lid 
triumph, Pecola climbed the stairs to their apartment.
Even before the door was opened to her tapping, she
could hear Poland singing—her voice sweet and hard, likenew strawberries:
I got blues in my mealbarrel
Blues up on the shelfI got blues in my mealbarrelBlues up on the shelfBlues in my bedroom’Cause I’m sleepin’ by myself
“Hi, dumplin’. Where your socks?” Marie seldom called
Pecola the same thing twice, but invariably her epithets werefond ones chosen from menus and dishes that were foreveruppermost in her mind.
“Hello, Miss Marie. Hello, Miss China. Hello, Miss
Poland.”
“You heard me. Where your socks? You as barelegged as
a yard dog.”
“I couldn’t ﬁnd any.”“Couldn’t ﬁnd any? Must be somethin’ in your house
that loves socks.”
China chuckled. Whenever something was missing,
Marie attributed its disappearance to “something in thehouse that loved it.” “There is somethin’ in this house thatloves brassieres,” she would say with alarm.
Poland and China were getting ready for the evening.51Poland, forever ironing, forever singing. China, sitting on a
pale-green kitchen chair, forever and forever curling her hair.Marie never got ready.
The women were friendly, but slow to begin talk. Pecola
always took the initiative with Marie, who, once inspired,was difﬁcult to stop.
“How come you got so many boyfriends, Miss Marie?”“Boyfriends? Boyfriends? Chittlin’, I ain’t seen a boy
since nineteen and twenty-seven.”
“You didn’t see none then.” China stuck the hot curlers
into a tin of Nu Nile hair dressing. The oil hissed at thetouch of the hot metal.
“How come, Miss Marie?” Pecola insisted.“How come what? How come I ain’t seen a boy since
nineteen and twenty-seven? Because they ain’t been no boys
since then. That’s when they stopped. Folks started gettin’born old.”
“You mean that’s when yougot old,” China said.
“I ain’t never got old. Just fat.”“Same thing.”“You think ’cause you skinny, folks think you young?
You’d make a haint buy a girdle.”
“And you look like the north side of a southbound mule.”“All I know is, them bandy little legs of yours is every bit
as old as mine.”
“Don’t worry ’bout my bandy legs. That’s the ﬁrst thing
they push aside.”
All three of the women laughed. Marie threw back her
head. From deep inside, her laughter came like the sound ofmany rivers, freely, deeply, muddily, heading for the room ofan open sea. China giggled spastically. Each gasp seemed tobe yanked out of her by an unseen hand jerking an unseenThe Bluest Eyestring. Poland, who seldom spoke unless she was drunk,
laughed without sound. When she was sober she hummedmostly or chanted blues songs, of which she knew many.
Pecola ﬁngered the fringe of a scarf that lay on the back of
a sofa. “I never seen nobody with as many boyfriends as yougot, Miss Marie. How come they all love you?”
Marie opened a bottle of root beer. “What else they gone
do? They know I’m rich and good-lookin’. They wants toput their toes in my curly hair, and get at my money.”
“You rich, Miss Marie?”“Puddin’, I got money’s mammy.”“Where you get it from? You don’t do no work.”“Yeah,” said China, “where you get it from?”“Hoover give it me. I did him a favor once, for the F. B.
and I.”
“What’d you do?”“I did him a favor. They wanted to catch this crook, you
see. Name of Johnny. He was as low-down as theycome .... ”
“We know that.” China arranged a curl.
“ . . . the F. B. and I. wanted him bad. He killed more peo-
ple than TB. And if you crossed him? Whoa, Jesus! He’d run
you as long as there was ground. Well, I was little and cutethen. No more than ninety pounds, soaking wet.”
“You ain’t never been soaking wet,” China said.“Well, you ain’t never been dry. Shut up. Let me tell you,
sweetnin’. To tell it true, I was the only one could handlehim. He’d go out and rob a bank or kill some people, and I’dsay to him, soft-like, ‘Johnny, you shouldn’t do that.’ Andhe’d say he just had to bring me pretty things. Lacy drawersand all. And every Saturday we’d get a case of beer and fryup some ﬁsh. We’d fry it in meal and egg batter, you know,53and when it was all brown and crisp—not hard, though—
we’d break open that cold bee r.... ”  M arie’s eyes went soft
as the memory of just such a meal sometime, somewheretransﬁxed her. All her stories were subject to breaking downat descriptions of food. Pecola saw Marie’s teeth settlingdown into the back of crisp sea bass; saw the fat ﬁngers put-ting back into her mouth tiny ﬂakes of white, hot meat thathad escaped from her lips; she heard the “pop” of the beer-bottle cap; smelled the acridness of the ﬁrst stream of vapor;felt the cold beeriness hit the tongue. She ended the day-dream long before Marie.
“But what about the money?” she asked.China hooted. “She’s makin’ like she’s the Lady in Red
that told on Dillinger. Dillinger wouldn’t have come nearyou lessen he was going hunting in Africa and shoot you fora hippo.”
“Well, this hippo had a ball back in Chicago. Whoa Jesus,
ninety-nine!”
“How come you always say ‘Whoa Jesus’ and a num-
ber?” Pecola had long wanted to know.
“Because my mama taught me never to cuss.”“Did she teach you not to drop your drawers?” China
asked.
“Didn’t have none,” said Marie. “Never saw a pair of
drawers till I was ﬁfteen, when I left Jackson and was doingday work in Cincinnati. My white lady gave me some oldones of hers. I thought they was some kind of stocking cap. Iput it on my head when I dusted. When she saw me, sheliked to fell out.”
“You must have been one dumb somebody.” China lit a
cigarette and cooled her irons.
“How’d I know?” Marie paused. “And what’s the use ofThe Bluest Eyeputting on something you got to keep taking off all the time?
Dewey never let me keep them on long enough to get used to them.”
“Dewey who?” This was a somebody new to Pecola.“Dewey who? Chicken! You never heard me tell of
Dewey? ” Marie was shocked by her negligence.
“No, ma’am.”“Oh, honey, you’ve missed half your life. Whoa Jesus,
one-nine-ﬁve. You talkin’ ’bout smooth! I met him when Iwas fourteen. We ran away and lived together like marriedfor three years. You know all those klinker-tops you seerunnin’ up here? Fifty of ’em in a bowl wouldn’t make aDewey Prince ankle bone. Oh, Lord. How that man lovedme!”
China arranged a ﬁngerful of hair into a bang effect.
“Then why he left you to sell tail?”
“Girl, when I found out I could sell it—that somebody
would pay cold cash for it, you could have knocked me overwith a feather.”
Poland began to laugh. Soundlessly. “Me too. My auntie
whipped me good that ﬁrst time when I told her I didn’t getno money. I said ‘Money? For what? He didn’t owe menothin’.’ She said, ‘The hell he didn’t!’”
They all dissolved in laughter.Three merry gargoyles. Three merry harridans. Amused
by a long-ago time of ignorance. They did not belong tothose generations of prostitutes created in novels, with greatand generous hearts, dedicated, because of the horror of cir-cumstance, to ameliorating the luckless, barren life of men,taking money incidentally and humbly for their “under-standing.” Nor were they from that sensitive breed ofyoung girl, gone wrong at the hands of fate, forced to culti-55vate an outward brittleness in order to protect her spring-
time from further shock, but knowing full well she was cutout for better things, and could make the right man happy.Neither were they the sloppy, inadequate whores who,unable to make a living at it alone, turn to drug consump-tion and trafﬁc or pimps to help complete their scheme ofself-destruction, avoiding suicide only to punish the mem-ory of some absent father or to sustain the misery of somesilent mother. Except for Marie’s fabled love for DeweyPrince, these women hated men, all men, without shame,apology, or discrimination. They abused their visitors witha scorn grown mechanical from use. Black men, white men,Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, Jews, Poles, whatever—all wereinadequate and weak, all came under their jaundiced eyesand were the recipients of their disinterested wrath. Theytook delight in cheating them. On one occasion the townwell knew, they lured a Jew up the stairs, pounced on him,all three, held him up by the heels, shook everything out ofhis pants pockets, and threw him out of the window.
Neither did they have respect for women, who, although
not their colleagues, so to speak, nevertheless deceived theirhusbands—regularly or irregularly, it made no difference.“Sugar-coated whores,” they called them, and did not yearnto be in their shoes. Their only respect was for what theywould have described as “good Christian colored women.”The woman whose reputation was spotless, and who tendedto her family, who didn’t drink or smoke or run around.These women had their undying, if covert, affection. Theywould sleep with their husbands, and take their money, butalways with a vengeance.
Nor were they protective and solicitous of youthful inno-
cence. They looked back on their own youth as a period ofThe Bluest Eyeignorance, and regretted that they had not made more of it.
They were not young girls in whores’ clothing, or whoresregretting their loss of innocence. They were whores inwhores’ clothing, whores who had never been young andhad no word for innocence. With Pecola they were as free asthey were with each other. Marie concocted stories for herbecause she was a child, but the stories were breezy andrough. If Pecola had announced her intention to live the lifethey did, they would not have tried to dissuade her or voicedany alarm.
“You and Dewey Prince have any children, Miss Marie?”“Yeah. Yeah. We had some.” Marie ﬁdgeted. She pulled a
bobby pin from her hair and began to pick her teeth. Thatmeant she didn’t want to talk anymore.
Pecola went to the window and looked down at the
empty street. A tuft of grass had forced its way up through acrack in the sidewalk, only to meet a raw October wind. Shethought of Dewey Prince and how he loved Miss Marie.What did love feel like? she wondered. How do grown-upsact when they love each other? Eat ﬁsh together? Into hereyes came the picture of Cholly and Mrs. Breedlove in bed.He making sounds as though he were in pain, as thoughsomething had him by the throat and wouldn’t let go.Terrible as his noises were, they were not nearly as bad as theno noise at all from her mother. It was as though she was noteven there. Maybe that was love. Choking sounds andsilence.
Turning her eyes from the window, Pecola looked at the
women.
China had changed her mind about the bangs and was
arranging a small but sturdy pompadour. She was adept increating any number of hair styles, but each one left her with57a pinched and harassed look. Then she applied makeup
heavily. Now she gave herself surprised eyebrows and acupid-bow mouth. Later she would make Oriental eyebrowsand an evilly slashed mouth.
Poland, in her sweet strawberry voice, began another
song:
I know a boy who is sky-soft brown
I know a boy who is sky-soft brownThe dirt leaps for joy when his feet touch the ground.
His strut is a peacockHis eye is burning brassHis smile is sorghum syrup drippin’ slow-sweet to
the last
I know a boy who is sky-soft brown
Marie sat shelling peanuts and popping them into her
mouth. Pecola looked and looked at the women. Were theyreal? Marie belched, softly, purringly, lovingly.The Bluest EyeWinter
LMy daddy’s face is a study. Winter moves into it and
presides there. His eyes become a cliff of snowthreatening to avalanche; his eyebrows bend like blacklimbs of leaﬂess trees. His skin takes on the pale,cheerless yellow of winter sun; for a jaw he has the edgesof a snowbound ﬁeld dotted with stubble; his highforehead is the frozen sweep of the Erie, hiding currentsof gelid thoughts that eddy in darkness. Wolf killerturned hawk ﬁghter, he worked night and day to keepone from the door and the other from under thewindowsills. A Vulcan guarding the ﬂames, he gives usinstructions about which doors to keep closed or openedfor proper distribution of heat, lays kindling by, discussesqualities of coal, and teaches us how to rake, feed, andbank the ﬁre. And he will not unrazor his lips untilspring.
Winter tightened our heads with a band of cold and
melted our eyes. We put pepper in the feet of ourstockings, Vaseline on our faces, and stared through dark
icebox mornings at four stewed prunes, slippery lumps ofoatmeal, and cocoa with a roof of skin.
But mostly we waited for spring, when there could be
gardens.
By the time this winter had stiffened itself into a
hateful knot that nothing could loosen, something didloosen it, or rather someone. A someone who splinteredthe knot into silver threads that tangled us, netted us,made us long for the dull chafe of the previous boredom.
This disrupter of seasons was a new girl in school
named Maureen Peal. A high-yellow dream child withlong brown hair braided into two lynch ropes that hungdown her back. She was rich, at least by our standards, asrich as the richest of the white girls, swaddled in comfortand care. The quality of her clothes threatened to derangeFrieda and me. Patent-leather shoes with buckles, acheaper version of which we got only at Easter and whichhad disintegrated by the end of May. Fluffy sweaters thecolor of lemon drops tucked into skirts with pleats soorderly they astounded us. Brightly colored knee sockswith white borders, a brown velvet coat trimmed in whiterabbit fur, and a matching muff. There was a hint ofspring in her sloe green eyes, something summery in hercomplexion, and a rich autumn ripeness in her walk.
She enchanted the entire school. When teachers called
on her, they smiled encouragingly. Black boys didn’t tripher in the halls; white boys didn’t stone her, white girlsdidn’t suck their teeth when she was assigned to be theirwork partners; black girls stepped aside when she wantedto use the sink in the girls’ toilet, and their eyesgenuﬂected under sliding lids. She never had to search forThe Bluest Eyeanybody to eat with in the cafeteria—they ﬂocked to the
table of her choice, where she opened fastidious lunches,shaming our jelly-stained bread with egg-saladsandwiches cut into four dainty squares, pink-frostedcupcakes, stocks of celery and carrots, proud, darkapples. She even bought and liked white milk.
Frieda and I were bemused, irritated, and fascinated by
her. We looked hard for ﬂaws to restore our equilibrium,but had to be content at ﬁrst with uglying up her name,changing Maureen Peal to Meringue Pie. Later a minorepiphany was ours when we discovered that she had adog tooth—a charming one to be sure—but a dog toothnonetheless. And when we found out that she had beenborn with six ﬁngers on each hand and that there was alittle bump where each extra one had been removed, wesmiled. They were small triumphs, but we took what wecould get—snickering behind her back and calling herSix-ﬁnger-dog-tooth-meringue-pie. But we had to do italone, for none of the other girls would cooperate withour hostility. They adored her.
When she was assigned a locker next to mine, I could
indulge my jealousy four times a day. My sister and Iboth suspected that we were secretly prepared to be herfriend, if she would let us, but I knew it would be adangerous friendship, for when my eye traced the whiteborder patterns of those Kelly-green knee socks, and feltthe pull and slack of my brown stockings, I wanted tokick her. And when I thought of the unearnedhaughtiness in her eyes, I plotted accidental slammings oflocker doors on her hand.
As locker friends, however, we got to know each other
a little, and I was even able to hold a sensible63conversation with her without visualizing her fall off a
cliff, or giggling my way into what I thought was a cleverinsult.
One day, while I waited at the locker for Frieda, she
joined me.
“Hi.”“Hi.”“Waiting for your sister?”“Uh-huh.”“Which way do you go home?”“Down Twenty-ﬁrst Street to Broadway.”“Why don’t you go down Twenty-second Street?”“’Cause I live on Twenty-ﬁrst Street.”“Oh. I can walk that way, I guess. Partly, anyway.”“Free country.”Frieda came toward us, her brown stockings straining
at the knees because she had tucked the toe under to hidea hole in the foot.
“Maureen’s gonna walk part way with us.”Frieda and I exchanged glances, her eyes begging my
restraint, mine promising nothing.
It was a false spring day, which, like Maureen, had
pierced the shell of a deadening winter. There werepuddles, mud, and an inviting warmth that deluded us.The kind of day on which we draped our coats over ourheads, left our galoshes in school, and came down withcroup the following day. We always responded to theslightest change in weather, the most minute shifts in timeof day. Long before seeds were stirring, Frieda and I werescrufﬁng and poking at the earth, swallowing air,drinking rai n....
As we emerged from the school with Maureen, weThe Bluest Eyebegan to moult immediately. We put our head scarves in
our coat pockets, and our coats on our heads. I waswondering how to maneuver Maureen’s fur muff into agutter when a commotion in the playground distractedus. A group of boys was circling and holding at bay avictim, Pecola Breedlove.
Bay Boy, Woodrow Cain, Buddy Wilson, Junie Bug—
like a necklace of semiprecious stones they surroundedher. Heady with the smell of their own musk, thrilled bythe easy power of a majority, they gaily harassed her.
“Black e mo. Black e mo. Yadaddsleepsnekked. Black
e mo black e mo ya dadd sleeps nekked. Black e mo ...”
They had extemporized a verse made up of two insults
about matters over which the victim had no control: thecolor of her skin and speculations on the sleeping habitsof an adult, wildly ﬁtting in its incoherence. That theythemselves were black, or that their own father hadsimilarly relaxed habits was irrelevant. It was theircontempt for their own blackness that gave the ﬁrst insultits teeth. They seemed to have taken all of their smoothlycultivated ignorance, their exquisitely learned self-hatred,their elaborately designed hopelessness and sucked it allup into a ﬁery cone of scorn that had burned for ages inthe hollows of their minds—cooled—and spilled over lipsof outrage, consuming whatever was in its path. Theydanced a macabre ballet around the victim, whom, fortheir own sake, they were prepared to sacriﬁce to theﬂaming pit.
Black e mo Black e mo Ya daddy sleeps nekked.
Stch ta ta stch ta tastach ta ta ta ta ta65Pecola edged around the circle crying. She had
dropped her notebook, and covered her eyes with herhands.
We watched, afraid they might notice us and turn their
energies our way. Then Frieda, with set lips and Mama’seyes, snatched her coat from her head and threw it on theground. She ran toward them and brought her booksdown on Woodrow Cain’s head. The circle broke.Woodrow Cain grabbed his head.
“Hey, girl!”“You cut that out, you hear?” I had never heard
Frieda’s voice so loud and clear.
Maybe because Frieda was taller than he was, maybe
because he saw her eyes, maybe because he had lostinterest in the game, or maybe because he had a crush onFrieda, in any case Woodrow looked frightened just longenough to give her more courage.
“Leave her ’lone, or I’m gone tell everybody what you
did!”
Woodrow did not answer; he just walled his eyes.Bay Boy piped up, “Go on, gal! Ain’t nobody
bothering you.”
“You shut up, Bullet Head.” I had found my tongue.“Who you calling Bullet Head?”“I’m calling you Bullet Head, Bullet Head.”Frieda took Pecola’s hand. “Come on.”“You want a fat lip?” Bay Boy drew back his ﬁst at
me.
“Yeah. Gimme one of yours.”“You gone get one.”Maureen appeared at my elbow, and the boys seemedThe Bluest Eyereluctant to continue under her springtime eyes so wide
with interest. They buckled in confusion, not willing tobeat up three girls under her watchful gaze. So theylistened to a budding male instinct that told them topretend we were unworthy of their attention.
“Come on, man.”“Yeah. Come on. We ain’t got time to fool with them.”Grumbling a few disinterested epithets, they moved
away.
I picked up Pecola’s notebook and Frieda’s coat, and
the four of us left the playground.
“Old Bullet Head, he’s always picking on girls.”Frieda agreed with me. “Miss Forrester said he was
incorrigival.”
“Really?” I didn’t know what that meant, but it had
enough of a doom sound in it to be true of Bay Boy.
While Frieda and I clucked on about the near ﬁght,
Maureen, suddenly animated, put her velvet-sleeved armthrough Pecola’s and began to behave as though theywere the closest of friends.
“I just moved here. My name is Maureen Peal. What’s
yours?”
“Pecola.”“Pecola? Wasn’t that the name of the girl in Imitation
of Life?”
“I don’t know. What is that?”“The picture show, you know. Where this mulatto girl
hates her mother cause she is black and ugly but thencries at the funeral. It was real sad. Everybody cries in it.Claudette Colbert too.”
“Oh.” Pecola’s voice was no more than a sigh.67“Anyway, her name was Pecola too. She was so pretty.
When it comes back, I’m going to see it again. Mymother has seen it four times.”
Frieda and I walked behind them, surprised at
Maureen’s friendliness to Pecola, but pleased. Maybe shewasn’t so bad, after all. Frieda had put her coat back onher head, and the two of us, so draped, trotted alongenjoying the warm breeze and Frieda’s heroics.
“You’re in my gym class, aren’t you?” Maureen asked
Pecola.
“Yes.”“Miss Erkmeister’s legs sure are bow. I bet she thinks
they’re cute. How come she gets to wear real shorts, andwe have to wear those old bloomers? I want to die everytime I put them on.”
Pecola smiled but did not look at Maureen.“Hey.” Maureen stopped short. “There’s an Isaley’s.
Want some ice cream? I have money.”
She unzipped a hidden pocket in her muff and pulled
out a multifolded dollar bill. I forgave her those kneesocks.
“My uncle sued Isaley’s,” Maureen said to the three of
us. “He sued the Isaley’s in Akron. They said he wasdisorderly and that that was why they wouldn’t servehim, but a friend of his, a policeman, came in and bearedthe witness, so the suit went through.”
“What’s a suit?”“It’s when you can beat them up if you want to and
won’t anybody do nothing. Our family does it all thetime. We believe in suits.”
At the entrance to Isaley’s Maureen turned to Frieda
and me, asking, “You all going to buy some ice cream?”The Bluest EyeWe looked at each other. “No,” Frieda said.
Maureen disappeared into the store with Pecola.Frieda looked placidly down the street; I opened my
mouth, but quickly closed it. It was extremely importantthat the world not know that I fully expected Maureen tobuy us some ice cream, that for the past 120seconds I
had been selecting the ﬂavor, that I had begun to likeMaureen, and that neither of us had a penny.
We supposed Maureen was being nice to Pecola
because of the boys, and were embarrassed to becaught—even by each other—thinking that she wouldtreat us, or that we deserved it as much as Pecola did.
The girls came out. Pecola with two dips of orange-
pineapple, Maureen with black raspberry.
“You should have got some,” she said. “They had all
kinds. Don’t eat down to the tip of the cone,” she advisedPecola.
“Why?”“Because there’s a ﬂy in there.”“How you know?”“Oh, not really. A girl told me she found one in the
bottom of hers once, and ever since then she throws thatpart away.”
“Oh.”We passed the Dreamland Theater, and Betty Grable
smiled down at us.
“Don’t you just love her?” Maureen asked.“Uh-huh,” said Pecola.I differed. “Hedy Lamarr is better.”Maureen agreed. “Ooooo yes. My mother told me
that a girl named Audrey, she went to the beauty parlorwhere we lived before, and asked the lady to ﬁx her hair69like Hedy Lamarr’s, and the lady said, ‘Yeah, when you
grow some hair like Hedy Lamarr’s.’” She laughed longand sweet.
“Sounds crazy,” said Frieda.“She sure is. Do you know she doesn’t even menstrate
yet, and she’s sixteen. Do you, yet?”
“Yes.” Pecola glanced at us.“So do I.” Maureen made no attempt to disguise her
pride. “Two months ago I started. My girl friend inToledo, where we lived before, said when she started shewas scared to death. Thought she had killed herself.”
“Do you know what it’s for?” Pecola asked the
question as though hoping to provide the answer herself.
“For babies.” Maureen raised two pencil-stroke
eyebrows at the obviousness of the question. “Babiesneed blood when they are inside you, and if you arehaving a baby, then you don’t menstrate. But whenyou’re not having a baby, then you don’t have to save theblood, so it comes out.”
“How do babies get the blood?” asked Pecola.“Through the like-line. You know. Where your belly
button is. That is where the like-line grows from andpumps the blood to the baby.”
“Well, if the belly buttons are to grow like-lines to give
the baby blood, and only girls have babies, how comeboys have belly buttons?”
Maureen hesitated. “I don’t know,” she admitted. “But
boys have all sorts of things they don’t need.” Hertinkling laughter was somehow stronger than our nervousones. She curled her tongue around the edge of the cone,scooping up a dollop of purple that made my eyes water.We were waiting for a stop light to change. Maureen The Bluest Eyekept scooping the ice cream from around the cone’s edge
with her tongue; she didn’t bite the edge as I would havedone. Her tongue circled the cone. Pecola had ﬁnishedhers; Maureen evidently liked her things to last. While Iwas thinking about her ice cream, she must have beenthinking about her last remark, for she said to Pecola,“Did you ever see a naked man?”
Pecola blinked, then looked away. “No. Where would
I see a naked man?”
“I don’t know. I just asked.”“I wouldn’t even look at him, even if I did see him.
That’s dirty. Who wants to see a naked man?” Pecola wasagitated. “Nobody’s father would be naked in front of hisown daughter. Not unless he was dirty too.”
“I didn’t say ‘father.’ I just said ‘a naked man.’”“ W e l l...”“How come you said ‘father’?” Maureen wanted to
know.
“Who else would she see, dog tooth?” I was glad to
have a chance to show anger. Not only because of the icecream, but because we had seen our own father nakedand didn’t care to be reminded of it and feel the shamebrought on by the absence of shame. He had beenwalking down the hall from the bathroom into hisbedroom and passed the open door of our room. We hadlain there wide-eyed. He stopped and looked in, trying tosee in the dark room whether we were really asleep—orwas it his imagination that opened eyes were looking athim? Apparently he convinced himself that we weresleeping. He moved away, conﬁdent that his little girlswould not lie open-eyed like that, staring, staring. Whenhe had moved on, the dark took only him away, not his71nakedness. That stayed in the room with us. 
Friendly-like.
“I’m not talking to you,” said Maureen. “Besides, I
don’t care if she sees her father naked. She can look athim all day if she wants to. Who cares?”
“You do,” said Frieda. “That’s all you talk about.”“It is not.”“It is so. Boys, babies, and somebody’s naked daddy.
You must be boy-crazy.”
“You better be quiet.”“Who’s gonna make me?” Frieda put her hand on her
hip and jutted her face toward Maureen.
“You all ready made. Mammy made.”“You stop talking about my mama.”“Well, you stop talking about my daddy.”“Who said anything about your old daddy?”“You did.”“Well, you started it.”“I wasn’t even talking to you. I was talking to Pecola.”“Yeah. About seeing her naked daddy.”“So what if she did see him?”Pecola shouted, “I never saw my daddy naked. Never.”“You did too,” Maureen snapped. “Bay Boy said so.”“I did not.”“You did.”“I did not.”“Did. Your own daddy, too!”Pecola tucked her head in—a funny, sad, helpless
movement. A kind of hunching of the shoulders, pullingin of the neck, as though she wanted to cover her ears.
“You stop talking about her daddy,” I said.The Bluest Eye“What do I care about her old black daddy?” asked
Maureen.
“Black? Who you calling black?”“You!”“You think you so cute!” I swung at her and missed,
hitting Pecola in the face. Furious at my clumsiness, Ithrew my notebook at her, but it caught her in the smallof her velvet back, for she had turned and was ﬂyingacross the street against trafﬁc.
Safe on the other side, she screamed at us, “I amcute!
And you ugly! Black and ugly black e mos. I amcute!”
She ran down the street, the green knee socks making
her legs look like wild dandelion stems that hadsomehow lost their heads. The weight of her remarkstunned us, and it was a second or two before Frieda andI collected ourselves enough to shout, “Six-ﬁnger-dog-tooth-meringue-pie!” We chanted this most powerful ofour arsenal of insults as long as we could see the greenstems and rabbit fur.
Grown people frowned at the three girls on the
curbside, two with their coats draped over their heads,the collars framing the eyebrows like nuns’ habits, blackgarters showing where they bit the tops of brownstockings that barely covered the knees, angry facesknotted like dark cauliﬂowers.
Pecola stood a little apart from us, her eyes hinged in
the direction in which Maureen had ﬂed. She seemed tofold into herself, like a pleated wing. Her painantagonized me. I wanted to open her up, crisp her edges, ram a stick down that hunched and curving spine,force her to stand erect and spit the misery out on the73streets. But she held it in where it could lap up into her
eyes.
Frieda snatched her coat from her head. “Come on,
Claudia. ’Bye, Pecola.”
We walked quickly at ﬁrst, and then slower, pausing
every now and then to fasten garters, tie shoelaces,scratch, or examine old scars. We were sinking under thewisdom, accuracy, and relevance of Maureen’s lastwords. If she was cute—and if anything could bebelieved, she was—then we were not. And what did that
mean? We were lesser. Nicer, brighter, but still lesser.Dolls we could destroy, but we could not destroy thehoney voices of parents and aunts, the obedience in theeyes of our peers, the slippery light in the eyes of ourteachers when they encountered the Maureen Peals of theworld. What was the secret? What did we lack? Why wasit important? And so what? Guileless and without vanity,we were still in love with ourselves then. We feltcomfortable in our skins, enjoyed the news that oursenses released to us, admired our dirt, cultivated ourscars, and could not comprehend this unworthiness.Jealousy we understood and thought natural—a desire tohave what somebody else had; but envy was a strange,new feeling for us. And all the time we knew thatMaureen Peal was not the Enemy and not worthy of suchintense hatred. The Thing to fear was the Thing that
made herbeautiful, and not us.
The house was quiet when we opened the door. The
acrid smell of simmering turnips ﬁlled our cheeks withsour saliva.
“Mama!”The Bluest EyeThere was no answer, but a sound of feet. Mr. Henry
shufﬂed part of the way down the stairs. One thick,hairless leg leaned out of his bathrobe.
“Hello there, Greta Garbo; hello, Ginger Rogers.”We gave him the giggle he was accustomed to. “Hello,
Mr. Henry. Where’s Mama?”
“She went to your grandmaw’s. Left word for you to
cut off the turnips and eat some graham crackers till shegot back. They in the kitchen.”
We sat in silence at the kitchen table, crumbling the
crackers into anthills. In a little while Mr. Henry cameback down the stairs. Now he had his trousers on underhis robe.
“Say. Wouldn’t you all like some cream?”“Oh, yes, sir.”“Here. Here’s a quarter. Gone over to Isaley’s and get
yourself some cream. You been good girls, ain’t you?”
His light-green words restored color to the day. “Yes,
sir. Thank you, Mr. Henry. Will you tell Mama for us ifshe comes?”
“Sure. But she ain’t due back for a spell.”Coatless, we left the house and had gotten all the way
to the corner when Frieda said, “I don’t want to go toIsaley’s.”
“What?”“I don’t want ice cream. I want potato chips.”“They got potato chips at Isaley’s.”“I know, but why go all that long way? Miss Bertha
got potato chips.”
“But I want ice cream.”“No you don’t, Claudia.”75“I do too.”
“Well, you go on to Isaley’s. I’m going to Miss
Bertha’s.”
“But you got the quarter, and I don’t want to go all the
way up there by myself.”
“Then let’s go to Miss Bertha’s. You like her candy,
don’t you?”
“It’s always stale, and she always runs out of stuff.”“Today is Friday. She orders fresh on Friday.”“And then that crazy old Soaphead Church lives
there.”
“So what? We’re together. We’ll run if he does
anything at us.”
“He scares me.”“Well, I don’t want to go up by Isaley’s. Suppose
Meringue Pie is hanging around. You want to run intoher, Claudia?”
“Come on, Frieda. I’ll get candy.”Miss Bertha had a small candy, snuff, and tobacco
store. One brick room sitting in her front yard. You hadto peep in the door, and if she wasn’t there, you knockedon the door of her house in back. This day she was sitting behind the counter reading a Bible in a tube ofsunlight.
Frieda bought potato chips, and we got three
Powerhouse bars for ten cents, and had a dime left. Wehurried back home to sit under the lilac bushes on theside of the house. We always did our Candy Dance thereso Rosemary could see us and get jealous. The CandyDance was a humming, skipping, foot-tapping, eating,smacking combination that overtook us when we hadThe Bluest Eyesweets. Creeping between the bushes and the side of the
house, we heard voices and laughter. We looked into theliving-room window, expecting to see Mama. Instead wesaw Mr. Henry and two women. In a playful manner, theway grandmothers do with babies, he was sucking theﬁngers of one of the women, whose laughter ﬁlled a tinyplace over his head. The other woman was buttoning hercoat. We knew immediately who they were, and our ﬂeshcrawled. One was China, and the other was called theMaginot Line. The back of my neck itched. These werethe fancy women of the maroon nail polish that Mamaand Big Mama hated. And in our house.
China was not too terrible, at least not in our
imaginations. She was thin, aging, absentminded, andunaggressive. But the Maginot Line. That was the one mymother said she “wouldn’t let eat out of one of herplates.” That was the one church women never allowedtheir eyes to rest on. That was the one who had killedpeople, set them on ﬁre, poisoned them, cooked them inlye. Although I thought the Maginot Line’s face, hiddenunder all that fat, was really sweet, I had heard too manyblack and red words about her, seen too many mouths gotriangle at the mention of her name, to dwell on anyredeeming features she might have.
Showing brown teeth, China seemed to be genuinely
enjoying Mr. Henry. The sight of him licking her ﬁngersbrought to mind the girlie magazines in his room. A coldwind blew somewhere in me, lifting little leaves of terrorand obscure longing. I thought I saw a mild lonesomenesscross the face of the Maginot Line. But it may have beenmy own image that I saw in the slow ﬂaring of her77nostrils, in her eyes that reminded me of waterfalls in
movies about Hawaii.
The Maginot Line yawned and said, “Come on,
China. We can’t hang in here all day. Them people behome soon.” She moved toward the door.
Frieda and I dropped down to the ground, looking
wildly into each other’s eyes. When the women weresome distance away, we went inside. Mr. Henry was inthe kitchen opening a bottle of pop.
“Back already?”“Yes, sir.”“Cream all gone?” His little teeth looked so kindly
and helpless. Was that really our Mr. Henry with China’sﬁngers?
“We got candy instead.”“You did huh? Ole sugar-tooth Greta Garbo.”He wiped the bottle sweat and turned it up to his
lips—a gesture that made me uncomfortable.
“Who were those women, Mr. Henry?”He choked on the pop and looked at Frieda. “What
you say?”
“Those women,” she repeated, “who just left. Who
were they?”
“Oh.” He laughed the grown-up getting-ready-to-lie
laugh. A heh-heh we knew well.
“Those were some members of my Bible class. We read
the scriptures together, and so they came today to readwith me.”
“Oh,” said Frieda. I was looking at his house slippers
to keep from seeing those kindly teeth frame a lie. Hewalked toward the stairs and then turned back to us.
“Bed’ not mention it to your mother. She don’t take toThe Bluest Eyeso much Bible study and don’t like me having visitors,
even if they good Christians.”
“No, sir, Mr. Henry. We won’t.”He rapidly mounted the stairs.“Should we?” I asked. “Tell Mama?”Frieda sighed. She had not even opened her
Powerhouse bar or her potato chips, and now she tracedthe letters on the candy wrappers with her ﬁngers.Suddenly she lifted her head and began to look all aroundthe kitchen.
“No. I guess not. No plates are out.”“Plates? What you talking about now?”“No plates are out. The Maginot Line didn’t eat out of
one of Mama’s plates. Besides, Mama would just fuss allday if we told her.”
We sat down and looked at the graham-cracker
anthills we had made.
“We better cut off the turnips. They’ll burn, and
Mama will whip us,” she said.
“I know.”“But if we let them burn, we won’t have to eat them.”“Heyyy, what a lovely idea,” I thought.“Which you want? A whipping and no turnips, or
turnips and no whippings?”
“I don’t know. Maybe we could burn them just a little
so Mama and Daddy can eat them, but we can say wecan’t.”
“O.K.”I made a volcano out of my anthill.“Frieda?”“What?”“What did Woodrow do that you was gonna tell?”79“Wet the bed. Mrs. Cain told Mama he won’t quit.”
“Old nasty.”The sky was getting dark; I looked out of the window
and saw snow falling. I poked my ﬁnger down into themouth of my volcano, and it toppled, dispersing thegolden grains into little swirls. The turnip pot crackled.The Bluest EyeSEETHECATITGOESMEOWMEOWCOM 
EANDPLAYCOMEPLAYWITHJANETHE KITTENWILLNOTPLAYPLAYPLAYPLA
They come from Mobile. Aiken. From Newport News.
From Marietta. From Meridian. And the sound of theseplaces in their mouths make you think of love. When youask them where they are from, they tilt their heads and say“Mobile” and you think you’ve been kissed. They say“Aiken” and you see a white butterﬂy glance off a fencewith a torn wing. They say “Nagadoches” and you want tosay “Yes, I will.” You don’t know what these towns are like,but you love what happens to the air when they open theirlips and let the names ease out.
Meridian. The sound of it opens the windows of a room
like the ﬁrst four notes of a hymn. Few people can say thenames of their home towns with such sly affection. Perhapsbecause they don’t have home towns, just places where theywere born. But these girls soak up the juice of their hometowns, and it never leaves them. They are thin brown girlswho have looked long at hollyhocks in the backyards ofMeridian, Mobile, Aiken, and Baton Rouge. And like holly-hocks they are narrow, tall, and still. Their roots are deep,
their stalks are ﬁrm, and only the top blossom nods in thewind. They have the eyes of people who can tell what time itis by the color of the sky. Such girls live in quiet black neigh-borhoods where everybody is gainfully employed. Wherethere are porch swings hanging from chains. Where thegrass is cut with a scythe, where rooster combs and sunﬂow-ers grow in the yards, and pots of bleeding heart, ivy, andmother-in-law tongue line the steps and windowsills. Suchgirls have bought watermelon and snapbeans from the fruitman’s wagon. They have put in the window the cardboardsign that has a pound measure printed on each of threeedges— 10lbs., 25lbs., 50lbs.—and no ice on the fourth.
These particular brown girls from Mobile and Aiken are notlike some of their sisters. They are not fretful, nervous, orshrill; they do not have lovely black necks that stretch asthough against an invisible collar; their eyes do not bite.These sugar-brown Mobile girls move through the streetswithout a stir. They are as sweet and plain as butter-cake.Slim ankles; long, narrow feet. They wash themselves withorange-colored Lifebuoy soap, dust themselves withCashmere Bouquet talc, clean their teeth with salt on a pieceof rag, soften their skin with Jergens Lotion. They smell likewood, newspapers, and vanilla. They straighten their hairwith Dixie Peach, and part it on the side. At night they curl itin paper from brown bags, tie a print scarf around theirheads, and sleep with hands folded across their stomachs.They do not drink, smoke, or swear, and they still call sex“nookey.” They sing second soprano in the choir, andalthough their voices are clear and steady, they are neverpicked to solo. They are in the second row, white blousesstarched, blue skirts almost purple from ironing.The Bluest EyeThey go to land-grant colleges, normal schools, and learn
how to do the white man’s work with reﬁnement: home eco-nomics to prepare his food; teacher education to instructblack children in obedience; music to soothe the weary mas-ter and entertain his blunted soul. Here they learn the rest ofthe lesson begun in those soft houses with porch swings andpots of bleeding heart: how to behave. The careful develop-ment of thrift, patience, high morals, and good manners. Inshort, how to get rid of the funkiness. The dreadful funki-ness of passion, the funkiness of nature, the funkiness of thewide range of human emotions.
Wherever it erupts, this Funk, they wipe it away; where it
crusts, they dissolve it; wherever it drips, ﬂowers, or clings,they ﬁnd it and ﬁght it until it dies. They ﬁght this battle allthe way to the grave. The laugh that is a little too loud; theenunciation a little too round; the gesture a little too gener-ous. They hold their behind in for fear of a sway too free;when they wear lipstick, they never cover the entire mouthfor fear of lips too thick, and they worry, worry, worryabout the edges of their hair.
They never seem to have boyfriends, but they always
marry. Certain men watch them, without seeming to, andknow that if such a girl is in his house, he will sleep on sheetsboiled white, hung out to dry on juniper bushes, and pressedﬂat with a heavy iron. There will be pretty paper ﬂowersdecorating the picture of his mother, a large Bible in the frontroom. They feel secure. They know their work clothes willbe mended, washed, and ironed on Monday, that theirSunday shirts will billow on hangers from the door jamb,stifﬂy starched and white. They look at her hands and knowwhat she will do with biscuit dough; they smell the coffeeand the fried ham; see the white, smoky grits with a dollop83of butter on top. Her hips assure them that she will bear 
children easily and painlessly. And they are right.
What they do not know is that this plain brown girl will
build her nest stick by stick, make it her own inviolableworld, and stand guard over its every plant, weed, and doily,even against him. In silence will she return the lamp to whereshe put it in the ﬁrst place; remove the dishes from the tableas soon as the last bite is taken; wipe the doorknob after agreasy hand has touched it. A sidelong look will be enoughto tell him to smoke on the back porch. Children will senseinstantly that they cannot come into her yard to retrieve aball. But the men do not know these things. Nor do theyknow that she will give him her body sparingly and partially.He must enter her surreptitiously, lifting the hem of hernightgown only to her navel. He must rest his weight on hiselbows when they make love, ostensibly to avoid hurting herbreasts but actually to keep her from having to touch or feeltoo much of him.
While he moves inside her, she will wonder why they
didn’t put the necessary but private parts of the body insome more convenient place—like the armpit, for example,or the palm of the hand. Someplace one could get to easily,and quickly, without undressing. She stiffens when she feelsone of her paper curlers coming undone from the activity oflove; imprints in her mind which one it is that is comingloose so she can quickly secure it once he is through. Shehopes he will not sweat—the damp may get into her hair;and that she will remain dry between her legs—she hates theglucking sound they make when she is moist. When shesenses some spasm about to grip him, she will make rapidmovements with her hips, press her ﬁngernails into his back,suck in her breath, and pretend she is having an orgasm. SheThe Bluest Eyemight wonder again, for the six hundredth time, what it
would be like to have thatfeeling while her husband’s penis
is inside her. The closest thing to it was the time she waswalking down the street and her napkin slipped free of hersanitary belt. It moved gently between her legs as shewalked. Gently, ever so gently. And then a slight and dis-tinctly delicious sensation collected in her crotch. As thedelight grew, she had to stop in the street, hold her thighstogether to contain it. That must be what it is like, shethinks, but it never happens while he is inside her. When he withdraws, she pulls her nightgown down, slips out of the bed and into the bathroom with relief.
Occasionally some living thing will engage her affections.
A cat, perhaps, who will love her order, precision, and constancy; who will be as clean and quiet as she is. The catwill settle quietly on the windowsill and caress her with hiseyes. She can hold him in her arms, letting his back pawsstruggle for footing on her breast and his forepaws cling toher shoulder. She can rub the smooth fur and feel the unre-sisting ﬂesh underneath. At her gentlest touch he will preen,stretch, and open his mouth. And she will accept thestrangely pleasant sensation that comes when he writhesbeneath her hand and ﬂattens his eyes with a surfeit of sensual delight. When she stands cooking at the table, hewill circle about her shanks, and the trill of his fur spirals upher legs to her thighs, to make her ﬁngers tremble a little inthe pie dough.
Or, as she sits reading the “Uplifting Thoughts” in The
Liberty Magazine, the cat will jump into her lap. She will
fondle that soft hill of hair and let the warmth of the ani-mal’s body seep over and into the deeply private areas of herlap. Sometimes the magazine drops, and she opens her legs85just a little, and the two of them will be still together, perhaps
shifting a little together, sleeping a little together, until fouro’clock, when the intruder comes home from work vaguelyanxious about what’s for dinner.
The cat will always know that he is ﬁrst in her affections.
Even after she bears a child. For she does bear a child—eas-ily, and painlessly. But only one. A son. Named Junior.
One such girl from Mobile, or Meridian, or Aiken who
did not sweat in her armpits nor between her thighs, whosmelled of wood and vanilla, who had made soufﬂés in theHome Economics Department, moved with her husband,Louis, to Lorain, Ohio. Her name was Geraldine. There shebuilt her nest, ironed shirts, potted bleeding hearts, playedwith her cat, and birthed Louis Junior.
Geraldine did not allow her baby, Junior, to cry. As long
as his needs were physical, she could meet them—comfortand satiety. He was always brushed, bathed, oiled, and shod.Geraldine did not talk to him, coo to him, or indulge him inkissing bouts, but she saw that every other desire was ful-ﬁlled. It was not long before the child discovered the differ-ence in his mother’s behavior to himself and the cat. As hegrew older, he learned how to direct his hatred of his motherto the cat, and spent some happy moments watching it suf-fer. The cat survived, because Geraldine was seldom awayfrom home, and could effectively soothe the animal whenJunior abused him.
Geraldine, Louis, Junior, and the cat lived next to the
playground of Washington Irving School. Junior consideredthe playground his own, and the schoolchildren coveted hisfreedom to sleep late, go home for lunch, and dominate theplayground after school. He hated to see the swings, slides,monkey bars, and seesaws empty and tried to get kids toThe Bluest Eyestick around as long as possible. White kids; his mother did
not like him to play with niggers. She had explained to himthe difference between colored people and niggers. Theywere easily identiﬁable. Colored people were neat and quiet;niggers were dirty and loud. He belonged to the formergroup: he wore white shirts and blue trousers; his hair wascut as close to his scalp as possible to avoid any suggestion ofwool, the part was etched into his hair by the barber. In win-ter his mother put Jergens Lotion on his face to keep the skinfrom becoming ashen. Even though he was light-skinned, itwas possible to ash. The line between colored and niggerwas not always clear; subtle and telltale signs threatened toerode it, and the watch had to be constant.
Junior used to long to play with the black boys. More
than anything in the world he wanted to play King of theMountain and have them push him down the mound of dirtand roll over him. He wanted to feel their hardness pressingon him, smell their wild blackness, and say “Fuck you” withthat lovely casualness. He wanted to sit with them on curb-stones and compare the sharpness of jackknives, the dis-tance and arcs of spitting. In the toilet he wanted to sharewith them the laurels of being able to pee far and long. BayBoy and P. L. had at one time been his idols. Gradually hecame to agree with his mother that neither Bay Boy nor P. L.was good enough for him. He played only with RalphNisensky, who was two years younger, wore glasses, anddidn’t want to doanything. More and more Junior enjoyed
bullying girls. It was easy making them scream and run.How he laughed when they fell down and their bloomersshowed. When they got up, their faces red and crinkled, itmade him feel good. The nigger girls he did not pick on verymuch. They usually traveled in packs, and once when he87threw a stone at some of them, they chased, caught, and beat
him witless. He lied to his mother, saying Bay Boy did it. Hismother was very upset. His father just kept on reading theLorain Journal .
When the mood struck him, he would call a child passing
by to come play on the swings or the seesaw. If the childwouldn’t, or did and left too soon, Junior threw gravel athim. He became a very good shot.
Alternately bored and frightened at home, the play-
ground was his joy. On a day when he had been especiallyidle, he saw a very black girl taking a shortcut through theplayground. She kept her head down as she walked. He hadseen her many times before, standing alone, always alone, atrecess. Nobody ever played with her. Probably, he thought,because she was ugly.
Now Junior called to her. “Hey! What are you doing
walking through my yard?”
The girl stopped.“Nobody can come through this yard ’less I say so.”“This ain’t your yard. It’s the school’s.”“But I’m in charge of it.”The girl started to walk away.“Wait.” Junior walked toward her. “You can play in it if
you want to. What’s your name?”
“Pecola. I don’t want to play.”“Come on. I’m not going to bother you.”“I got to go home.”“Say, you want to see something? I got something to
show you.”
“No. What is it?”“Come on in my house. See, I live right there. Come on.
I’ll show you.”The Bluest Eye“Show me what?”
“Some kittens. We got some kittens. You can have one if
you want.”
“Real kittens?”“Yeah. Come on.”He pulled gently at her dress. Pecola began to move
toward his house. When he knew she had agreed, Juniorran ahead excitedly, stopping only to yell back at her tocome on. He held the door open for her, smiling hisencouragement. Pecola climbed the porch stairs and hesi-tated there, afraid to follow him. The house looked dark.Junior said, “There’s nobody here. My ma’s gone out,and my father’s at work. Don’t you want to see the kit-tens?”
Junior turned on the lights. Pecola stepped inside the
door.
How beautiful, she thought. What a beautiful house.
There was a big red-and-gold Bible on the dining-roomtable. Little lace doilies were everywhere—on arms andbacks of chairs, in the center of a large dining table, on littletables. Potted plants were on all the windowsills. A colorpicture of Jesus Christ hung on a wall with the prettiestpaper ﬂowers fastened on the frame. She wanted to seeeverything slowly, slowly. But Junior kept saying, “Hey, you.Come on. Come on.” He pulled her into another room, evenmore beautiful than the ﬁrst. More doilies, a big lamp withgreen-and-gold base and white shade. There was even a rugon the ﬂoor, with enormous dark-red ﬂowers. She was deepin admiration of the ﬂowers when Junior said, “Here!”Pecola turned. “Here is your kitten!” he screeched. And hethrew a big black cat right in her face. She sucked in herbreath in fear and surprise and felt fur in her mouth. The cat89clawed her face and chest in an effort to right itself, then
leaped nimbly to the ﬂoor.
Junior was laughing and running around the room
clutching his stomach delightedly. Pecola touched thescratched place on her face and felt tears coming. When shestarted toward the doorway, Junior leaped in front of her.
“You can’t get out. You’re my prisoner,” he said. His eyes
were merry but hard.
“You let me go.”“No!” He pushed her down, ran out the door that sepa-
rated the rooms, and held it shut with his hands. Pecola’sbanging on the door increased his gasping, high-pitchedlaughter.
The tears came fast, and she held her face in her hands.
When something soft and furry moved around her ankles,she jumped, and saw it was the cat. He wound himself in andabout her legs. Momentarily distracted from her fear, shesquatted down to touch him, her hands wet from the tears.The cat rubbed up against her knee. He was black all over,deep silky black, and his eyes, pointing down toward hisnose, were bluish green. The light made them shine like blueice. Pecola rubbed the cat’s head; he whined, his tongue ﬂick-ing with pleasure. The blue eyes in the black face held her.
Junior, curious at not hearing her sobs, opened the door,
and saw her squatting down rubbing the cat’s back. He sawthe cat stretching its head and ﬂattening its eyes. He had seenthat expression many times as the animal responded to hismother’s touch.
“Gimme my cat!” His voice broke. With a movement
both awkward and sure he snatched the cat by one of itshind legs and began to swing it around his head in a circle.The Bluest Eye“Stop that!” Pecola was screaming. The cat’s free paws
were stiffened, ready to grab anything to restore balance, itsmouth wide, its eyes blue streaks of horror.
Still screaming, Pecola reached for Junior’s hand. She
heard her dress rip under her arm. Junior tried to push heraway, but she grabbed the arm which was swinging the cat.They both fell, and in falling, Junior let go the cat, which,having been released in mid-motion, was thrown full forceagainst the window. It slithered down and fell on the radia-tor behind the sofa. Except for a few shudders, it was still.There was only the slightest smell of singed fur.
Geraldine opened the door.“What is this?” Her voice was mild, as though asking a
perfectly reasonable question. “Who is this girl?”
“She killed our cat,” said Junior. “Look.” He pointed to
the radiator, where the cat lay, its blue eyes closed, leavingonly an empty, black, and helpless face.
Geraldine went to the radiator and picked up the cat. He
was limp in her arms, but she rubbed her face in his fur. Shelooked at Pecola. Saw the dirty torn dress, the plaits stickingout on her head, hair matted where the plaits had comeundone, the muddy shoes with the wad of gum peeping outfrom between the cheap soles, the soiled socks, one ofwhich had been walked down into the heel of the shoe. Shesaw the safety pin holding the hem of the dress up. Up overthe hump of the cat’s back she looked at her. She had seenthis little girl all of her life. Hanging out of windows oversaloons in Mobile, crawling over the porches of shotgunhouses on the edge of town, sitting in bus stations holdingpaper bags and crying to mothers who kept saying “Shetup!” Hair uncombed, dresses falling apart, shoes untied91and caked with dirt. They had stared at her with great
uncomprehending eyes. Eyes that questioned nothing andasked everything. Unblinking and unabashed, they staredup at her. The end of the world lay in their eyes, and thebeginning, and all the waste in between.
They were everywhere. They slept six in a bed, all their
pee mixing together in the night as they wet their beds eachin his own candy-and-potato-chip dream. In the long, hotdays, they idled away, picking plaster from the walls anddigging into the earth with sticks. They sat in little rows onstreet curbs, crowded into pews at church, taking spacefrom the nice, neat, colored children; they clowned on theplaygrounds, broke things in dime stores, ran in front of youon the street, made ice slides on the sloped sidewalks in win-ter. The girls grew up knowing nothing of girdles, and theboys announced their manhood by turning the bills of theircaps backward. Grass wouldn’t grow where they lived.Flowers died. Shades fell down. Tin cans and tires blos-somed where they lived. They lived on cold black-eyed peasand orange pop. Like ﬂies they hovered; like ﬂies they set-tled. And this one had settled in her house. Up over thehump of the cat’s back she looked.
“Get out,” she said, her voice quiet. “You nasty little
black bitch. Get out of my house.”
The cat shuddered and ﬂicked his tail.Pecola backed out of the room, staring at the pretty milk-
brown lady in the pretty gold-and-green house who wastalking to her through the cat’s fur. The pretty lady’s wordsmade the cat fur move; the breath of each word parted thefur. Pecola turned to ﬁnd the front door and saw Jesus look-ing down at her with sad and unsurprised eyes, his longThe Bluest Eyebrown hair parted in the middle, the gay paper ﬂowers
twisted around his face.
Outside, the March wind blew into the rip in her dress.
She held her head down against the cold. But she could nothold it low enough to avoid seeing the snowﬂakes fallingand dying on the pavement.93Spring
LThe ﬁrst twigs are thin, green, and supple. They bend
into a complete circle, but will not break. Their delicate,showy hopefulness shooting from forsythia and lilacbushes meant only a change in whipping style. They beatus differently in the spring. Instead of the dull pain of awinter strap, there were these new green switches thatlost their sting long after the whipping was over. Therewas a nervous meanness in these long twigs that made uslong for the steady stroke of a strap or the ﬁrm buthonest slap of a hairbrush. Even now spring for me isshot through with the remembered ache of switchings,and forsythia holds no cheer.
Sunk in the grass of an empty lot on a spring Saturday,
I split the stems of milkweed and thought about ants andpeach pits and death and where the world went when Iclosed my eyes. I must have lain long in the grass, for theshadow that was in front of me when I left the house haddisappeared when I went back. I entered the house, as thehouse was bursting with an uneasy quiet. Then I heard
my mother singing something about trains and Arkansas.She came in the back door with some folded yellowcurtains which she piled on the kitchen table. I sat downon the ﬂoor to listen to the song’s story, and noticed howstrangely she was behaving. She still had her hat on, andher shoes were dusty, as though she had been walking indeep dirt. She put on some water to boil and then sweptthe porch; then she hauled out the curtain stretcher, butinstead of putting the damp curtains on it, she swept theporch again. All the time singing about trains andArkansas.
When she ﬁnished, I went to look for Frieda. I found
her upstairs lying on our bed, crying the tired,whimpering cry that follows the ﬁrst wailings—mostlygasps and shudderings. I lay on the bed and looked at thetiny bunches of wild roses sprinkled over her dress. Manywashings had faded their color and dimmed theiroutlines.
“What happened, Frieda?”She lifted a swollen face from the crook of her arm.
Shuddering still, she sat up, letting her thin legs dangleover the bedside. I knelt on the bed and picked up thehem of my dress to wipe her running nose. She neverliked wiping noses on clothes, but this time she let me. Itwas the way Mama did with her apron.
“Did you get a whipping?”She shook her head no.“Then why you crying?”“Because.”“Because what?”“Mr. Henry.”The Bluest Eye“What’d he do?”
“Daddy beat him up.”“What for? The Maginot Line? Did he ﬁnd out about
the Maginot Line?”
“No.”“Well, what, then? Come on, Frieda. How come I
can’t know?”
“He . . . picked at me.”
“Picked at you? You mean like Soaphead Church?”“Sort of.”“He showed his privates at you?”“Noooo. He touched me.”“Where?”“Here and here.” She pointed to the tiny breasts that,
like two fallen acorns, scattered a few faded rose leaveson her dress.
“Really? How did it feel?”“Oh, Claudia.” She sounded put-out. I wasn’t asking
the right questions.
“It didn’t feel like anything.”“But wasn’t it supposed to? Feel good, I mean?”
Frieda sucked her teeth. “What’d he do? Just walk upand pinch them?”
She sighed. “First he said how pretty I was. Then he
grabbed my arm and touched me.”
“Where was Mama and Daddy?”“Over at the garden weeding.”“What’d you say when he did it?”“Nothing. I just ran out the kitchen and went to the
garden.”
“Mama said we was never to cross the tracks by
ourselves.”99“Well, what would you do? Set there and let him pinch
you?”
I looked at my chest. “I don’t have nothing to pinch.
I’m never going to have nothing.”
“Oh, Claudia, you’re jealous of everything. You want
him to?”
“No, I just get tired of having everything last.”“You do not. What about scarlet fever? You had that
ﬁrst.”
“Yes, but it didn’t last. Anyway, what happened at the
garden?”
“I told Mama, and she told Daddy, and we all come
home, and he was gone, so we waited for him, and whenDaddy saw him come up on the porch, he threw our oldtricycle at his head and knocked him off the porch.”
“Did he die?”“Naw. He got up and started singing ‘Nearer My God
to Thee.’ Then Mama hit him with a broom and told himto keep the Lord’s name out of his mouth, but hewouldn’t stop, and Daddy was cussing, and everybodywas screaming.”
“Oh, shoot, I always miss stuff.”“And Mr. Buford came running out with his gun, and
Mama told him to go somewhere and sit down, andDaddy said no, give him the gun, and Mr. Buford did,and Mama screamed, and Mr. Henry shut up and startedrunning, and Daddy shot at him and Mr. Henry jumpedout of his shoes and kept on running in his socks. ThenRosemary came out and said that Daddy was going tojail, and I hit her.”
“Real hard?”“Real hard.”The Bluest Eye“Is that when Mama whipped you?”
“She didn’t whip me, I told you.”“Then why you crying?”“Miss Dunion came in after everybody was quiet, and
Mama and Daddy was fussing about who let Mr. Henryin anyway, and she said that Mama should take me to thedoctor, because I might be ruined, and Mama startedscreaming all over again.”
“At you?”“No. At Miss Dunion.”“But why were you crying?”“I don’t want to be ruined! ”
“What’s ruined?”“You know. Like the Maginot Line. She’s ruined.
Mama said so.” The tears came back.
An image of Frieda, big and fat, came to mind. Her
thin legs swollen, her face surrounded by layers of rougedskin. I too begin to feel tears.
“But, Frieda, you could exercise and not eat.”She shrugged.“Besides, what about China and Poland? They’re
ruined too, aren’t they? And they ain’t fat.”
“That’s because they drink whiskey. Mama says
whiskey ate them up.”
“You could drink whiskey.”“Where would I get whiskey?”We thought about this. Nobody would sell it to us; we
had no money, anyway. There was never any in ourhouse. Who would have some?
“Pecola,” I said. “Her father’s always drunk. She can
get us some.”
“You think so?”101“Sure. Cholly’s always drunk. Let’s go ask her. We
don’t have to tell her what for.”
“Now?”“Sure, now.”“What’ll we tell Mama?”“Nothing. Let’s just go out the back. One at a time. So
she won’t notice.”
“O.K. You go ﬁrst, Claudia.”We opened the fence gate at the bottom of the
backyard and ran down the alley.
Pecola lived on the other side of Broadway. We had
never been in her house, but we knew where it was. Atwo-story gray building that had been a store downstairsand had an apartment upstairs.
Nobody answered our knock on the front door, so we
walked around to the side door. As we approached, weheard radio music and looked to see where it came from.Above us was the second-story porch, lined withslanting, rotting rails, and sitting on the porch was theMaginot Line herself. We stared up and automaticallyreached for the other’s hand. A mountain of ﬂesh, she lay rather than sat in a rocking chair. She had no shoeson, and each foot was poked between a railing: tinybaby toes at the tip of puffy feet; swollen anklessmoothed and tightened the skin; massive legs like treestumps parted wide at the knees, over which spread tworoads of soft ﬂabby inner thigh that kissed each otherdeep in the shade of her dress and closed. A dark-brownroot-beer bottle, like a burned limb, grew out of herdimpled hand. She looked at us down through the porchrailings and emitted a low, long belch. Her eyes were asclean as rain, and again I remembered the waterfall.The Bluest EyeNeither of us could speak. Both of us imagined we were
seeing what was to become of Frieda. The Maginot Linesmiled at us.
“You all looking for somebody?”I had to pull my tongue from the roof of my mouth to
say, “Pecola—she live here?”
“Uh-huh, but she ain’t here now. She gone to her
mama’s work place to git the wash.”
“Yes, ma’am. She coming back?”“Uh-huh. She got to hang up the clothes before the sun
goes down.”
“Oh.”“You can wait for her. Wanna come up here and
wait?”
We exchanged glances. I looked back up at the broad
cinnamon roads that met in the shadow of her dress.
Frieda said, “No, ma’am.”“Well,” the Maginot Line seemed interested in our
problem. “You can go to her mama’s work place, but it’sway over by the lake.”
“Where by the lake?”“That big white house with the wheelbarrow full of
ﬂowers.”
It was a house that we knew, having admired the large
white wheelbarrow tilted down on spoked wheels andplanted with seasonal ﬂowers.
“Ain’t that too far for you all to go walking?”Frieda scratched her knee.“Why don’t you wait for her? You can come up here.
Want some pop?” Those rain-soaked eyes lit up, and hersmile was full, not like the pinched and holding-backsmile of other grown-ups.103I moved to go up the stairs, but Frieda said, “No,
ma’am, we ain’t allowed.”
I was amazed at her courage, and frightened of her
sassiness. The smile of the Maginot Line slipped. “Ain’t’llowed?”
“No’m.”“Ain’t ’llowed to what?”“Go in your house.”“Is that right?” The waterfalls were still. “How
come?”
“My mama said so. My mama said you ruined.”The waterfalls began to run again. She put the root-
beer bottle to her lips and drank it empty. With agraceful movement of the wrist, a gesture so quick andsmall we never really saw it, only remembered itafterward, she tossed the bottle over the rail at us. It splitat our feet, and shards of brown glass dappled our legsbefore we could jump back. The Maginot Line put a fathand on one of the folds of her stomach and laughed. Atﬁrst just a deep humming with her mouth closed, then alarger, warmer sound. Laughter at once beautiful andfrightening. She let her head tilt sideways, closed hereyes, and shook her massive trunk, letting the laughterfall like a wash of red leaves all around us. Scraps andcurls of the laughter followed us as we ran. Our breathgave out at the same time our legs did. After we restedagainst a tree, our heads on crossed forearms, I said,“Let’s go home.”
Frieda was still angry—ﬁghting, she believed, for her
life. “No, we got to get it now.”
“We can’t go all the way to the lake.”The Bluest Eye“Yes we can. Come on.”
“Mama gone get us.”“No she ain’t. Besides, she can’t do nothing but whip
us.”
That was true. She wouldn’t kill us, or laugh a terrible
laugh at us, or throw a bottle at us.
We walked down tree-lined streets of soft gray houses
leaning like tired ladies ....  The streets changed; houses
looked more sturdy, their paint was newer, porch postsstraighter, yards deeper. Then came brick houses set wellback from the street, fronted by yards edged in shrubberyclipped into smooth cones and balls of velvet green.
The lakefront houses were the loveliest. Garden
furniture, ornaments, windows like shiny eyeglasses, andno sign of life. The backyards of these houses fell away ingreen slopes down to a strip of sand, and then the blueLake Erie, lapping all the way to Canada. The orange-patched sky of the steel-mill section never reached thispart of town. This sky was always blue.
We reached Lake Shore Park, a city park laid out with
rosebuds, fountains, bowling greens, picnic tables. It wasempty now, but sweetly expectant of clean, white, well-behaved children and parents who would play thereabove the lake in summer before half-running, half-stumbling down the slope to the welcoming water. Blackpeople were not allowed in the park, and so it ﬁlled ourdreams.
Right before the entrance to the park was the large
white house with the wheelbarrow full of ﬂowers. Shortcrocus blades sheathed the purple-and-white hearts thatso wished to be ﬁrst they endured the chill and rain of105early spring. The walkway was ﬂagged in calculated
disorder, hiding the cunning symmetry. Only fear ofdiscovery and the knowledge that we did not belong keptus from loitering. We circled the proud house and went to the back.
There on the tiny railed stoop sat Pecola in a light red
sweater and blue cotton dress. A little wagon was parkednear her. She seemed glad to see us.
“Hi.”“Hi.”“What you all doing here?” She was smiling, and since
it was a rare thing to see on her, I was surprised at thepleasure it gave me.
“We’re looking for you.”“Who told you I was here?”“The Maginot Line.”“Who is that?”“That big fat lady. She lives over you.”“Oh, you mean Miss Marie. Her name is Miss Marie.”“Well, everybody calls her Miss Maginot Line. Ain’t
you scared?”
“Scared of what?”“The Maginot Line.”Pecola looked genuinely puzzled. “What for?”“Your mama let you go in her house? And eat out of
her plates?”
“She don’t know I go. Miss Marie is nice. They all
nice.”
“Oh, yeah,” I said, “she tried to kill us.”“Who? Miss Marie? She don’t bother nobody.”“Then how come your mama don’t let you go in her
house if she so nice?”The Bluest Eye“I don’t know. She say she’s bad, but they ain’t bad.
They give me stuff all the time.”
“What stuff?”“Oh, lots of stuff, pretty dresses, and shoes. I got more
shoes than I ever wear. And jewelry and candy andmoney. They take me to the movies, and once we went tothe carnival. China gone take me to Cleveland to see thesquare, and Poland gone take me to Chicago to see theLoop. We going everywhere together.”
“You lying. You don’t have no pretty dresses.”“I do, too.”“Oh, come on, Pecola, what you telling us all that
junk for?” Frieda asked.
“It ain’t junk.” Pecola stood up ready to defend her
words, when the door opened.
Mrs. Breedlove stuck her head out the door and said,
“What’s going on out here? Pecola, who are thesechildren?”
“That’s Frieda and Claudia, Mrs. Breedlove.”“Whose girls are you?” She came all the way out on
the stoop. She looked nicer than I had ever seen her, inher white uniform and her hair in a small pompadour.
“Mrs. MacTeer’s girls, ma’am.”“Oh, yes. Live over on Twenty-ﬁrst Street?”“Yes, ma’am.”“What are you doing ’way over here?”“Just walking. We came to see Pecola.”“Well, you better get on back. You can walk with
Pecola. Come on in while I get the wash.”
We stepped into the kitchen, a large spacious room.
Mrs. Breedlove’s skin glowed like taffeta in the reﬂectionof white porcelain, white woodwork, polished cabinets,107and brilliant copperware. Odors of meat, vegetables, and
something freshly baked mixed with a scent of FelsNaphtha.
“I’m gone get the wash. You all stand stock still right
there and don’t mess up nothing.” She disappeared behinda white swinging door, and we could hear the uneven ﬂapof her footsteps as she descended into the basement.
Another door opened, and in walked a little girl,
smaller and younger than all of us. She wore a pinksunback dress and pink ﬂuffy bedroom slippers with twobunny ears pointed up from the tips. Her hair was cornyellow and bound in a thick ribbon. When she saw us,fear danced across her face for a second. She lookedanxiously around the kitchen.
“Where’s Polly?” she asked.The familiar violence rose in me. Her calling Mrs.
Breedlove Polly, when even Pecola called her mother Mrs.Breedlove, seemed reason enough to scratch her.
“She’s downstairs,” I said.“Polly!” she called.“Look,” Frieda whispered, “look at that.” On the
counter near the stove in a silvery pan was a deep-dishberry cobbler. The purple juice bursting here and therethrough crust. We moved closer.
“It’s still hot,” Frieda said.Pecola stretched her hand to touch the pan, lightly, to
see if it was hot.
“Polly, come here,” the little girl called again.It may have been nervousness, awkwardness, but the pan
tilted under Pecola’s ﬁngers and fell to the ﬂoor, splatteringblackish blueberries everywhere. Most of the juice splashedon Pecola’s legs, and the burn must have been painful, forThe Bluest Eyeshe cried out and began hopping about just as Mrs.
Breedlove entered with a tightly packed laundry bag. In onegallop she was on Pecola, and with the back of her handknocked her to the ﬂoor. Pecola slid in the pie juice, one legfolding under her. Mrs. Breedlove yanked her up by thearm, slapped her again, and in a voice thin with anger,abused Pecola directly and Frieda and me by implication.
“Crazy fool ...m y  ﬂ o o r ,  mess . . . look what yo u...
work . . . get on out . . . now that . . . crazy ...m y  
ﬂoor, my ﬂoor ...m y  ﬂ o o r . ”  Her words were hotter and
darker than the smoking berries, and we backed away indread.
The little girl in pink started to cry. Mrs. Breedlove
turned to her. “Hush, baby, hush. Come here. Oh, Lord,look at your dress. Don’t cry no more. Polly will changeit.” She went to the sink and turned tap water on a freshtowel. Over her shoulder she spit out words to us likerotten pieces of apple. “Pick up that wash and get on outof here, so I can get this mess cleaned up.”
Pecola picked up the laundry bag, heavy with wet
clothes, and we stepped hurriedly out the door. As Pecolaput the laundry bag in the wagon, we could hear Mrs.Breedlove hushing and soothing the tears of the littlepink-and-yellow girl.
“Who were they, Polly?”“Don’t worry none, baby.”“You gonna make another pie?”“’Course I will.”“Who were they, Polly?”“Hush. Don’t worry none,” she whispered, and the
honey in her words complemented the sundown spillingon the lake.109SEEMOTHERMOTHERISVERYNICEMO 
THERWILLYOUPLAYWITHJANEMOTH ERLAUGHSLAUGHMOTHERLAUGHLA
The easiest thing to do would be to build a case out of her
foot. That is what she herself did. But to ﬁnd out the truthabout how dreams die, one should never take the word ofthe dreamer. The end of her lovely beginning was probablythe cavity in one of her front teeth. She preferred, however,to think always of her foot. Although she was the ninth ofeleven children and lived on a ridge of red Alabama clayseven miles from the nearest road, the complete indifferencewith which a rusty nail was met when it punched clearthrough her foot during her second year of life saved PaulineWilliams from total anonymity. The wound left her with acrooked, archless foot that ﬂopped when she walked—not alimp that would have eventually twisted her spine, but a wayof lifting the bad foot as though she were extracting it fromlittle whirlpools that threatened to pull it under. Slight as itwas, this deformity explained for her many things thatwould have been otherwise incomprehensible: why shealone of all the children had no nickname; why there were
no funny jokes and anecdotes about funny things she haddone; why no one ever remarked on her food preferences—no saving of the wing or neck for her—no cooking of thepeas in a separate pot without rice because she did not likerice; why nobody teased her; why she never felt at homeanywhere, or that she belonged anyplace. Her general feel-ing of separateness and unworthiness she blamed on herfoot. Restricted, as a child, to this cocoon of her family’sspinning, she cultivated quiet and private pleasures. Sheliked, most of all, to arrange things. To line things up inrows—jars on shelves at canning, peach pits on the step,sticks, stones, leaves—and the members of her family letthese arrangements be. When by some accident somebodyscattered her rows, they always stopped to retrieve them forher, and she was never angry, for it gave her a chance torearrange them again. Whatever portable plurality shefound, she organized into neat lines, according to their size,shape, or gradations of color. Just as she would never align apine needle with the leaf of a cottonwood tree, she wouldnever put the jars of tomatoes next to the green beans.During all of her four years of going to school, she wasenchanted by numbers and depressed by words. Shemissed—without knowing what she missed—paints andcrayons.
Near the beginning of World War I, the Williamses dis-
covered, from returning neighbors and kin, the possibility ofliving better in another place. In shifts, lots, batches, mixedin with other families, they migrated, in six months and fourjourneys, to Kentucky, where there were mines and mill-work.111“When all us left from down home and was waiting
down by the depot for the truck, it was nighttime. Junebugs was shooting everywhere. They lighted up a tree leaf, and I seen a streak of green every now and again. That was the last time I seen real june bugs. These things up here ain’t june bugs. They’s something else. Folks herecall them ﬁreﬂies. Down home they was different. But Irecollect that streak of green. I recollect it well.”
In Kentucky they lived in a real town, ten to ﬁfteen houses
on a single street, with water piped right into the kitchen.Ada and Fowler Williams found a ﬁve-room frame housefor their family. The yard was bounded by a once-whitefence against which Pauline’s mother planted ﬂowers andwithin which they kept a few chickens. Some of her brothersjoined the Army, one sister died, and two got married,increasing the living space and giving the entire Kentuckyventure a feel of luxury. The relocation was especially com-fortable to Pauline, who was old enough to leave school.Mrs. Williams got a job cleaning and cooking for a whiteminister on the other side of town, and Pauline, now the old-est girl at home, took over the care of the house. She kept thefence in repair, pulling the pointed stakes erect, securingthem with bits of wire, collected eggs, swept, cooked,washed, and minded the two younger children—a pair oftwins called Chicken and Pie, who were still in school. Shewas not only good at housekeeping, she enjoyed it. After herparents left for work and the other children were at schoolor in mines, the house was quiet. The stillness and isolationboth calmed and energized her. She could arrange and cleanwithout interruption until two o’clock, when Chicken andPie came home.The Bluest EyeWhen the war ended and the twins were ten years old,
they too left school to work. Pauline was ﬁfteen, still keep-ing house, but with less enthusiasm. Fantasies about menand love and touching were drawing her mind and handsaway from her work. Changes in weather began to affecther, as did certain sights and sounds. These feelings trans-lated themselves to her in extreme melancholy. She thoughtof the death of newborn things, lonely roads, and strangerswho appear out of nowhere simply to hold one’s hand,woods in which the sun was always setting. In church espe-cially did these dreams grow. The songs caressed her, andwhile she tried to hold her mind on the wages of sin, herbody trembled for redemption, salvation, a mysterious re-birth that would simply happen, with no effort on her part.In none of her fantasies was she ever aggressive; she wasusually idling by the river bank, or gathering berries in aﬁeld when a someone appeared, with gentle and penetratingeyes, who—with no exchange of words—understood; andbefore whose glance her foot straightened and her eyesdropped. The someone had no face, no form, no voice, noodor. He was a simple Presence, an all-embracing tender-ness with strength and a promise of rest. It did not matterthat she had no idea of what to do or say to the Presence—after the wordless knowing and the soundless touching, herdreams disintegrated. But the Presence would know what todo. She had only to lay her head on his chest and he wouldlead her away to the sea, to the city, to the woods . . .forever.
There was a woman named Ivy who seemed to hold in
her mouth all of the sounds of Pauline’s soul. Standing a lit-tle apart from the choir, Ivy sang the dark sweetness thatPauline could not name; she sang the death-defying death113that Pauline yearned for; she sang of the Stranger who
knew ...
Precious Lord take my hand
Lead me on, let me standI am tired, I am weak, I am worn.Through the storms, through the nightLead me on to the lightTake my hand, precious Lord, lead me on.
When my way grows drear
Precious Lord linger near,When my life is almost goneHear my cry hear my callHold my hand lest I fallTake my hand, precious Lord, lead me on.
Thus it was that when the Stranger, the someone, did
appear out of nowhere, Pauline was grateful but not surprised.
He came, strutting right out of a Kentucky sun on the
hottest day of the year. He came big, he came strong, hecame with yellow eyes, ﬂaring nostrils, and he came with hisown music.
Pauline was leaning idly on the fence, her arms resting
on the crossrail between the pickets. She had just put downsome biscuit dough and was cleaning the ﬂour from under her nails. Behind her at some distance she heardwhistling. One of these rapid, high-note riffs that blackboys make up as they go while sweeping, shoveling, or justwalking along. A kind of city-street music where laughterbelies anxiety, and joy is as short and straight as the bladeThe Bluest Eyeof a pocketknife. She listened carefully to the music and let
it pull her lips into a smile. The whistling got louder, andstill she did not turn around, for she wanted it to last.While smiling to herself and holding fast to the break insomber thoughts, she felt something tickling her foot. Shelaughed aloud and turned to see. The whistler was bendingdown tickling her broken foot and kissing her leg. Shecould not stop her laughter—not until he looked up at herand she saw the Kentucky sun drenching the yellow, heavy-lidded eyes of Cholly Breedlove.
“When I ﬁrst seed Cholly, I want you to know it was
like all the bits of color from that time down home when all us chil’ren went berry picking after a funeral and I putsome in the pocket of my Sunday dress, and they mashedup and stained my hips. My whole dress was messed with purple, and it never did wash out. Not the dress norme. I could feel that purple deep inside me. And thatlemonade Mama used to make when Pap came in out theﬁelds. It be cool and yellowish, with seeds ﬂoating near the bottom. And that streak of green them june bugs made on the trees the night we left from down home. All of them colors was in me. Just sitting there. So when Cholly come up and tickled my foot, it was like themberries, that lemonade, them streaks of green the june bugs made, all come together. Cholly was thin then, withreal light eyes. He used to whistle, and when I heerd him,shivers come on my skin.”
Pauline and Cholly loved each other. He seemed to relish
her company and even to enjoy her country ways and lackof knowledge about city things. He talked with her about115her foot and asked, when they walked through the town or
in the ﬁelds, if she were tired. Instead of ignoring her inﬁr-mity, pretending it was not there, he made it seem like some-thing special and endearing. For the ﬁrst time Pauline feltthat her bad foot was an asset.
And he did touch her, ﬁrmly but gently, just as she had
dreamed. But minus the gloom of setting suns and lonelyriver banks. She was secure and grateful; he was kind andlively. She had not known there was so much laughter in theworld.
They agreed to marry and go ’way up north, where
Cholly said steel mills were begging for workers. Young, lov-ing, and full of energy, they came to Lorain, Ohio. Chollyfound work in the steel mills right away, and Pauline startedkeeping house.
And then she lost her front tooth. But there must have
been a speck, a brown speck easily mistaken for food butwhich did not leave, which sat on the enamel for months,and grew, until it cut into the surface and then to the brownputty underneath, ﬁnally eating away to the root, butavoiding the nerves, so its presence was not noticeable oruncomfortable. Then the weakened roots, having grownaccustomed to the poison, responded one day to severepressure, and the tooth fell free, leaving a ragged stumpbehind. But even before the little brown speck, there musthave been the conditions, the setting that would allow it toexist in the ﬁrst place.
In that young and growing Ohio town whose side streets,
even, were paved with concrete, which sat on the edge of acalm blue lake, which boasted an afﬁnity with Oberlin, theunderground railroad station, just thirteen miles away, thisThe Bluest Eyemelting pot on the lip of America facing the cold but recep-
tive Canada—What could go wrong?
“Me and Cholly was getting along good then. We
come up north; supposed to be more jobs and all. Wemoved into two rooms up over a furniture store, and I set about housekeeping. Cholly was working at the steelplant, and everything was looking good. I don’t knowwhat all happened. Everything changed. It was hard toget to know folks up here, and I missed my people. Iweren’t used to so much white folks. The ones I seedbefore was something hateful, but they didn’t comearound too much. I mean, we didn’t have too much truckwith them. Just now and then in the ﬁelds, or at thecommissary. But they want all over us. Up north theywas everywhere—next door, downstairs, all over thestreets—and colored folks few and far between. Northerncolored folk was different too. Dicty-like. No better thanwhites for meanness. They could make you feel just asno-count, ’cept I didn’t expect it from them. That was the lonesomest time of my life. I ’member looking outthem front windows just waiting for Cholly to comehome at three o’clock. I didn’t even have a cat to talk to.”
In her loneliness, she turned to her husband for reassur-
ance, entertainment, for things to ﬁll the vacant places.Housework was not enough; there were only two rooms,and no yard to keep or move about in. The women in thetown wore high-heeled shoes, and when Pauline tried towear them, they aggravated her shufﬂe into a pronounced117limp. Cholly was kindness still, but began to resist her total
dependence on him. They were beginning to have less andless to say to each other. He had no problem ﬁnding otherpeople and other things to occupy him—men were alwaysclimbing the stairs asking for him, and he was happy toaccompany them, leaving her alone.
Pauline felt uncomfortable with the few black women she
met. They were amused by her because she did notstraighten her hair. When she tried to make up her face as
they did, it came of f rather badly. Their goading glances and
private snickers at her way of talking (saying “chil’ren”) anddressing developed in her a desire for new clothes. WhenCholly began to quarrel about the money she wanted, shedecided to go to work. Taking jobs as a day worker helpedwith the clothes, and even a few things for the apartment,but it did not help with Cholly. He was not pleased with herpurchases and began to tell her so. Their marriage wasshredded with quarrels. She was still no more than a girl,and still waiting for that plateau of happiness, that hand ofa precious Lord who, when her way grew drear, wouldalways linger near. Only now she had a clearer idea of whatdrear meant. Money became the focus of all their discus-sions, hers for clothes, his for drink. The sad thing was thatPauline did not really care for clothes and makeup. Shemerely wanted other women to cast favorable glances herway.
After several months of doing day work, she took a
steady job in the home of a family of slender means andnervous, pretentious ways.
“Cholly commenced to getting meaner and meaner and
wanted to ﬁght me all of the time. I give him as good as The Bluest EyeI got. Had to. Look like working for that woman and
ﬁghting Cholly was all I did. Tiresome. But I holt on tomy jobs, even though working for that woman was morethan a notion. It wasn’t so much her meanness as justsimpleminded. Her whole family was. Couldn’t get alongwith one another worth nothing. You’d think with apretty house like that and all the money they could holton to, they would enjoy one another. She haul off and cry over the leastest thing. If one of her friends cut hershort on the telephone, she’d go to crying. She should ofbeen glad she had a telephone. I ain’t got one yet. Irecollect oncet how her baby brother who she put through dentistry school didn’t invite them to some bigparty he throwed. They was a big to-do about that.Everybody stayed on the telephone for days. Fussing andcarrying on. She asked me, ‘Pauline, what would you do if your own brother had a party and didn’t invite you?’ Isaid ifn I really wanted to go to that party, I reckoned I’dgo anyhow. Never mind what he want. She just suckedher teeth a little and made out like what I said was dumb. All the while I was thinking how dumb she was.Whoever told her that her brother was her friend? Folkscan’t like folks just ’cause they has the same mama. I tried to like that woman myself. She was good aboutgiving me stuff, but I just couldn’t like her. Soon as Iworked up a good feeling on her account, she’d dosomething ignorant and start in to telling me how to clean and do. If I left her on her own, she’d drown in dirt. I didn’t have to pick up after Chicken and Pie theway I had to pick up after them. None of them knew somuch as how to wipe their behinds. I know, ’cause I didthe washing. And couldn’t pee proper to save their lives.119Her husband ain’t hit the bowl yet. Nasty white folks is
about the nastiest things they is. But I would have stayedon ’cepting for Cholly come over by where I was working and cut up so. He come there drunk wantingsome money. When that white woman see him, she turned red. She tried to act strong-like, but she was scared bad. Anyway, she told Cholly to get out or shewould call the police. He cussed her and started pulling on me. I would of gone upside his head, but I don’t wantno dealings with the police. So I taken my things and left.I tried to get back, but she didn’t want me no more if Iwas going to stay with Cholly. She said she would let mestay if I left him. I thought about that. But later on itdidn’t seem none too bright for a black woman to leave ablack man for a white woman. She didn’t never give methe eleven dollars she owed me, neither. That hurt bad.The gas man had cut the gas off, and I couldn’t cooknone. I really begged that woman for my money. I went to see her. She was mad as a wet hen. Kept on telling me I owed her for uniforms and some old broken-down bedshe give me. I didn’t know if I owed her or not, but Ineeded my money. She wouldn’t let up none, neither, even when I give her my word that Cholly wouldn’t come back there no more. Then I got so desperate I asked her if she would loan it to me. She was quiet for aspell, and then she told me I shouldn’t let a man takeadvantage over me. That I should have more respect, andit was my husband’s duty to pay the bills, and if hecouldn’t, I should leave and get alimony. All such simplestuff. What was he gone give me alimony on? I seen shedidn’t understand that all I needed from her was myThe Bluest Eyeeleven dollars to pay the gas man so I could cook. She
couldn’t get that one thing through her thick head. ‘Areyou going to leave him, Pauline?’ she kept on saying. Ithought she’d give me my money if I said I would, so Isaid ‘Yes, ma’am.’ ‘All right,’ she said. ‘You leave him, and then come back to work, and we’ll let bygones bebygones.’ ‘Can I have my money today?’ I said. ‘No’ shesaid. ‘Only when you leave him. I’m only thinking of youand your future. What good is he, Pauline, what good ishe to you?’ How you going to answer a woman like that,who don’t know what good a man is, and say out of oneside of her mouth she’s thinking of your future but won’tgive you your own money so you can buy you somethingbesides baloney to eat? So I said, ‘No good, ma’am. Heain’t no good to me. But just the same, I think I’d beststay on.’ She got up, and I left. When I got outside, I feltpains in my crotch, I had held my legs together so tighttrying to make that woman understand. But I reckon now she couldn’t understand. She married a man with aslash in his face instead of a mouth. So how could sheunderstand?”
One winter Pauline discovered she was pregnant. When
she told Cholly, he surprised her by being pleased. He beganto drink less and come home more often. They eased backinto a relationship more like the early days of their mar-riage, when he asked if she were tired or wanted him tobring her something from the store. In this state of ease,Pauline stopped doing day work and returned to her ownhousekeeping. But the loneliness in those two rooms had notgone away. When the winter sun hit the peeling green paint121of the kitchen chairs, when the smoked hocks were boiling
in the pot, when all she could hear was the truck deliveringfurniture downstairs, she thought about back home, abouthow she had been all alone most of the time then too, butthat this lonesomeness was different. Then she stopped star-ing at the green chairs, at the delivery truck; she went to themovies instead. There in the dark her memory was re-freshed, and she succumbed to her earlier dreams. Alongwith the idea of romantic love, she was introduced toanother—physical beauty. Probably the most destructiveideas in the history of human thought. Both originated inenvy, thrived in insecurity, and ended in disillusion. Inequating physical beauty with virtue, she stripped her mind,bound it, and collected self-contempt by the heap. She for-got lust and simple caring for. She regarded love as posses-sive mating, and romance as the goal of the spirit. It wouldbe for her a well-spring from which she would draw themost destructive emotions, deceiving the lover and seekingto imprison the beloved, curtailing freedom in every way.
She was never able, after her education in the movies, to
look at a face and not assign it some category in the scale ofabsolute beauty, and the scale was one she absorbed in fullfrom the silver screen. There at last were the darkenedwoods, the lonely roads, the river banks, the gentle knowingeyes. There the ﬂawed became whole, the blind sighted, andthe lame and halt threw away their crutches. There deathwas dead, and people made every gesture in a cloud ofmusic. There the black-and-white images came together,making a magniﬁcent whole—all projected through the rayof light from above and behind.
It was really a simple pleasure, but she learned all there
was to love and all there was to hate.The Bluest Eye“The onliest time I be happy seem like was when I was
in the picture show. Every time I got, I went. I’d go early, before the show started. They’d cut off the lights,and everything be black. Then the screen would light up,and I’d move right on in them pictures. White men taking such good care of they women, and they all dressed up in big clean houses with the bathtubs right inthe same room with the toilet. Them pictures gave me alot of pleasure, but it made coming home hard, andlooking at Cholly hard. I don’t know. I ’member one time I went to see Clark Gable and Jean Harlow. I ﬁxedmy hair up like I’d seen hers on a magazine. A part on the side, with one little curl on my forehead. It looked just like her. Well, almost just like. Anyway, I sat in thatshow with my hair done up that way and had a goodtime. I thought I’d see it through to the end again, and Igot up to get me some candy. I was sitting back in myseat, and I taken a big bite of that candy, and it pulled atooth right out of my mouth. I could of cried. I had goodteeth, not a rotten one in my head. I don’t believe I everdid get over that. There I was, ﬁve months pregnant,trying to look like Jean Harlow, and a front tooth gone.Everything went then. Look like I just didn’t care no more after that. I let my hair go back, plaited it up, andsettled down to just being ugly. I still went to the pictures, though, but the meanness got worse. I wantedmy tooth back. Cholly poked fun at me, and we startedﬁghting again. I tried to kill him. He didn’t hit me toohard, ’cause I were pregnant I guess, but the ﬁghts, oncethey got started up again, kept up. He begin to make memadder than anything I knowed, and I couldn’t keep myhands off him. Well, I had that baby—a boy—and after123that got pregnant again with another one. But it weren’t
like I thought it was gone be. I loved them and all, I guess, but maybe it was having no money, or maybe itwas Cholly, but they sure worried the life out of me.Sometimes I’d catch myself hollering at them and beatingthem, and I’d feel sorry for them, but I couldn’t seem tostop. When I had the second one, a girl, I ’member I saidI’d love it no matter what it looked like. She looked like a black ball of hair. I don’t recollect trying to get pregnant that ﬁrst time. But that second time, I actuallytried to get pregnant. Maybe ’cause I’d had one alreadyand wasn’t scairt to do it. Anyway, I felt good, and wasn’t thinking on the carrying, just the baby itself. I used to talk to it whilst it be still in the womb. Like goodfriends we was. You know. I be hanging wash and Iknowed lifting weren’t good for it. I’d say to it holt onnow I gone hang up these few rags, don’t get froggy; it be over soon. It wouldn’t leap or nothing. Or I be mixingsomething in a bowl for the other chile and I’d talk to itthen too. You know, just friendly talk. On up til the end I felted good about that baby. I went to the hospital when my time come. So I could be easeful. I didn’t wantto have it at home like I done with the boy. They put mein a big room with a whole mess of women. The painswas coming, but not too bad. A little old doctor come toexamine me. He had all sorts of stuff. He gloved his handand put some kind of jelly on it and rammed it upbetween my legs. When he left off, some more doctorscome. One old one and some young ones. The old onewas learning the young ones about babies. Showing themhow to do. When he got to me he said now these herewomen you don’t have any trouble with. They deliverThe Bluest Eyeright away and with no pain. Just like horses. The young
ones smiled a little. They looked at my stomach andbetween my legs. They never said nothing to me. Onlyone looked at me. Looked at my face, I mean. I lookedright back at him. He dropped his eyes and turned red. He knowed, I reckon, that maybe I weren’t no horsefoaling. But them others. They didn’t know. They wenton. I seed them talking to them white women: ‘How youfeel? Gonna have twins?’ Just shucking them, of course,but nice talk. Nice friendly talk. I got edgy, and whenthem pains got harder, I was glad. Glad to havesomething else to think about. I moaned something awful. The pains wasn’t as bad as I let on, but I had to let them people know having a baby was more than abowel movement. I hurt just like them white women. Just’cause I wasn’t hooping and hollering before didn’t mean I wasn’t feeling pain. What’d they think? That just ’causeI knowed how to have a baby with no fuss that mybehind wasn’t pulling and aching like theirs? Besides, thatdoctor don’t know what he talking about. He must neverseed no mare foal. Who say they don’t have no pain? Just’cause she don’t cry? ’Cause she can’t say it, they think itain’t there? If they looks in her eyes and see them eyeballs lolling back, see the sorrowful look, they’d know. Anyways, the baby come. Big old healthy thing.She looked different from what I thought. Reckon Italked to it so much before I conjured up a mind’s eyeview of it. So when I seed it, it was like looking at apicture of your mama when she was a girl. You knowswho she is, but she don’t look the same. They give her tome for a nursing, and she liked to pull my nipple off right away. She caught on fast. Not like Sammy, he was125the hardest child to feed. But Pecola look like she 
knowed right off what to do. A right smart baby she was. I used to like to watch her. You know they makesthem greedy sounds. Eyes all soft and wet. A crossbetween a puppy and a dying man. But I knowed she wasugly. Head full of pretty hair, but Lord she was ugly.”
When Sammy and Pecola were still young Pauline had to
go back to work. She was older now, with no time fordreams and movies. It was time to put all of the piecestogether, make coherence where before there had been none.The children gave her this need; she herself was no longer achild. So she became, and her process of becoming was likemost of ours: she developed a hatred for things that mysti-ﬁed or obstructed her; acquired virtues that were easy tomaintain; assigned herself a role in the scheme of things; andharked back to simpler times for gratiﬁcation.
She took on the full responsibility and recognition of
breadwinner and returned to church. First, however, shemoved out of the two rooms into a spacious ﬁrst ﬂoor of abuilding that had been built as a store. She came into herown with the women who had despised her, by being moremoral than they; she avenged herself on Cholly by forcinghim to indulge in the weaknesses she despised. She joined achurch where shouting was frowned upon, served on Stew-ardess Board No. 3, and became a member of Ladies Circle
No. 1. At prayer meeting she moaned and sighed over
Cholly’s ways, and hoped God would help her keep the chil-dren from the sins of the father. She stopped saying“chil’ren” and said “childring” instead. She let anothertooth fall, and was outraged by painted ladies who thoughtonly of clothes and men. Holding Cholly as a model of sinThe Bluest Eyeand failure, she bore him like a crown of thorns, and her
children like a cross.
It was her good fortune to ﬁnd a permanent job in the
home of a well-to-do family whose members were affec-tionate, appreciative, and generous. She looked at theirhouses, smelled their linen, touched their silk draperies, andloved all of it. The child’s pink nightie, the stacks of whitepillow slips edged with embroidery, the sheets with tophems picked out with blue cornﬂowers. She became what isknown as an ideal servant, for such a role ﬁlled practicallyall of her needs. When she bathed the little Fisher girl, it wasin a porcelain tub with silvery taps running inﬁnite quanti-ties of hot, clear water. She dried her in ﬂuffy white towelsand put her in cuddly night clothes. Then she brushed theyellow hair, enjoying the roll and slip of it between her ﬁn-gers. No zinc tub, no buckets of stove-heated water, noﬂaky, stiff, grayish towels washed in a kitchen sink, dried ina dusty backyard, no tangled black puffs of rough wool tocomb. Soon she stopped trying to keep her own house. Thethings she could afford to buy did not last, had no beauty orstyle, and were absorbed by the dingy storefront. More andmore she neglected her house, her children, her man—theywere like the afterthoughts one has just before sleep, theearly-morning and late-evening edges of her day, the darkedges that made the daily life with the Fishers lighter, moredelicate, more lovely. Here she could arrange things, cleanthings, line things up in neat rows. Here her foot ﬂoppedaround on deep pile carpets, and there was no unevensound. Here she found beauty, order, cleanliness, andpraise. Mr. Fisher said, “I would rather sell her blueberrycobblers than real estate.” She reigned over cupboardsstacked high with food that would not be eaten for weeks,127even months; she was queen of canned vegetables bought
by the case, special fondants and ribbon candy curled up intiny silver dishes. The creditors and service people whohumiliated her when she went to them on her own behalfrespected her, were even intimidated by her, when she spokefor the Fishers. She refused beef slightly dark or with edgesnot properly trimmed. The slightly reeking ﬁsh that sheaccepted for her own family she would all but throw in theﬁsh man’s face if he sent it to the Fisher house. Power,praise, and luxury were hers in this household. They evengave her what she had never had—a nickname—Polly. Itwas her pleasure to stand in her kitchen at the end of a dayand survey her handiwork. Knowing there were soap barsby the dozen, bacon by the rasher, and reveling in her shinypots and pans and polished ﬂoors. Hearing, “We’ll never lether go. We could never ﬁnd anybody like Polly. She will not
leave the kitchen until everything is in order. Really, she isthe ideal servant.”
Pauline kept this order, this beauty, for herself, a private
world, and never introduced it into her storefront, or to herchildren. Them she bent toward respectability, and in sodoing taught them fear: fear of being clumsy, fear of beinglike their father, fear of not being loved by God, fear of mad-ness like Cholly’s mother’s. Into her son she beat a louddesire to run away, and into her daughter she beat a fear ofgrowing up, fear of other people, fear of life.
All the meaningfulness of her life was in her work. For
her virtues were intact. She was an active church woman,did not drink, smoke, or carouse, defended herself mightilyagainst Cholly, rose above him in every way, and felt shewas fulﬁlling a mother’s role conscientiously when shepointed out their father’s faults to keep them from havingThe Bluest Eyethem, or punished them when they showed any slovenli-
ness, no matter how slight, when she worked twelve to six-teen hours a day to support them. And the world itselfagreed with her.
It was only sometimes, sometimes, and then rarely, that
she thought about the old days, or what her life hadturned to. They were musings, idle thoughts, full some-times of the old dreaminess, but not the kind of thing shecared to dwell on.
“I started to leave him once, but something came up.
Once, after he tried to set the house on ﬁre, I was all setin my mind to go. I can’t even ’member now what heldme. He sure ain’t give me much of a life. But it wasn’t allbad. Sometimes things wasn’t all bad. He used to comeeasing into bed sometimes, not too drunk. I make outlike I’m asleep, ’cause it’s late, and he taken three dollarsout of my pocketbook that morning or something. I hearhim breathing, but I don’t look around. I can see in mymind’s eye his black arms thrown back behind his head,the muscles like great big peach stones sanded down,with veins running like little swollen rivers down hisarms. Without touching him I be feeling those ridges onthe tips of my ﬁngers. I sees the palms of his handscalloused to granite, and the long ﬁngers curled up andstill. I think about the thick, knotty hair on his chest, andthe two big swells his breast muscles make. I want to rubmy face hard in his chest and feel the hair cut my skin. Iknow just where the hair growth slacks out—just abovehis navel—and how it picks up again and spreads out.Maybe he’ll shift a little, and his leg will touch me, or Ifeel his ﬂank just graze my behind. I don’t move even yet.129Then he lift his head, turn over, and put his hand on my
waist. If I don’t move, he’ll move his hand over to pulland knead my stomach. Soft and slow-like. I still don’tmove, because I don’t want him to stop. I want topretend sleep and have him keep on rubbing my stomach.Then he will lean his head down and bite my tit. Then Idon’t want him to rub my stomach anymore. I want himto put his hand between my legs. I pretend to wake up,and turn to him, but not opening my legs. I want him toopen them for me. He does, and I be soft and wet wherehis ﬁngers are strong and hard. I be softer than I everbeen before. All my strength in his hand. My brain curlsup like wilted leaves. A funny, empty feeling is in myhands. I want to grab holt of something, so I hold hishead. His mouth is under my chin. Then I don’t want hishand between my legs no more, because I think I amsoftening away. I stretch my legs open, and he is on topof me. Too heavy to hold, and too light not to. He putshis thing in me. In me. In me. I wrap my feet around hisback so he can’t get away. His face is next to mine. Thebed springs sounds like them crickets used to back home.He puts his ﬁngers in mine, and we stretches our armsoutwise like Jesus on the cross. I hold on tight. My ﬁngers and my feet hold on tight, because everything elseis going, going. I know he wants me to come ﬁrst. But Ican’t. Not until he does. Not until I feel him loving me.Just me. Sinking into me. Not until I know that my ﬂeshis all that be on his mind. That he couldn’t stop if he hadto. That he would die rather than take his thing out ofme. Of me. Not until he has let go of all he has, and giveit to me. To me. To me. When he does, I feel a power. I be strong, I be pretty, I be young. And then I wait. HeThe Bluest Eyeshivers and tosses his head. Now I be strong enough,
pretty enough, and young enough to let him make mecome. I take my ﬁngers out of his and put my hands onhis behind. My legs drop back onto the bed. I don’t makeno noise, because the chil’ren might hear. I begin to feelthose little bits of color ﬂoating up into me—deep in me.That streak of green from the june-bug light, the purplefrom the berries trickling along my thighs, Mama’slemonade yellow runs sweet in me. Then I feel like I’mlaughing between my legs, and the laughing gets allmixed up with the colors, and I’m afraid I’ll come, andafraid I won’t. But I know I will. And I do. And it berainbow all inside. And it lasts and lasts and lasts. I wantto thank him, but don’t know how, so I pat him like youdo a baby. He asks me if I’m all right. I say yes. He getsoff me and lies down to sleep. I want to say something,but I don’t. I don’t want to take my mind offen therainbow. I should get up and go to the toilet, but I don’t.Besides, Cholly is asleep with his leg throwed over me. Ican’t move and don’t want to.
“But it ain’t like that anymore. Most times he’s
thrashing away inside me before I’m woke, and throughwhen I am. The rest of the time I can’t even be next to his stinking drunk self. But I don’t care ’bout it no more.My Maker will take care of me. I know He will. I knowHe will. Besides, it don’t make no difference about thisold earth. There is sure to be a glory. Only thing I misssometimes is that rainbow. But like I say, I don’t recollectit much anymore.”131SEEFATHERHEISBIGANDSTRONGFATH 
ERWILLYOUPLAYWITHJANEFATHER ISSMILINGSMILEFATHERSMILESMILE
When Cholly was four days old, his mother wrapped him
in two blankets and one newspaper and placed him on ajunk heap by the railroad. His Great Aunt Jimmy, who hadseen her niece carrying a bundle out of the back door, res-cued him. She beat his mother with a razor strap andwouldn’t let her near the baby after that. Aunt Jimmy raisedCholly herself, but took delight sometimes in telling him ofhow she had saved him. He gathered from her that hismother wasn’t right in the head. But he never had a chanceto ﬁnd out, because she ran away shortly after the razorstrap, and no one had heard of her since.
Cholly was grateful for having been saved. Except some-
times. Sometimes when he watched Aunt Jimmy eating col-lards with her ﬁngers, sucking her four gold teeth, orsmelled her when she wore the asafetida bag around herneck, or when she made him sleep with her for warmth inwinter and he could see her old, wrinkled breasts sagging inher nightgown—then he wondered whether it would havebeen just as well to have died there. Down in the rim of a
tire under a soft black Georgia sky.
He had four years of school before he got courage enough
to ask his aunt who and where his father was.
“That Fuller boy, I believe it was,” his aunt said. “He was
hanging around then, but he taken off pretty quick beforeyou was born. I think he gone to Macon. Him or his brother.Maybe both. I hear old man Fuller say something ’bout itonce.”
“What name he have?” asked Cholly.“Fuller, Foolish.”“I mean what his given name?”“Oh.” She closed her eyes to think, and sighed. “Can’t
recollect nothing no more. Sam, was it? Yeh. Samuel. No.No, it wasn’t. It was Samson. Samson Fuller.”
“How come you all didn’t name me Samson?” Cholly’s
voice was low.
“What for? He wasn’t nowhere around when you was
born. Your mama didn’t name you nothing. The nine dayswasn’t up before she throwed you on the junk heap. When Igot you I named you myself on the ninth day. You namedafter my dead brother. Charles Breedlove. A good man. Ain’tno Samson never come to no good end.”
Cholly didn’t ask anything else.Two years later he quit school to take a job at Tyson’s
Feed and Grain Store. He swept up, ran errands, weighedbags, and lifted them onto the drays. Sometimes they let himride with the drayman. A nice old man called Blue Jack. Blueused to tell him old-timey stories about how it was when theEmancipation Proclamation came. How the black peoplehollered, cried, and sang. And ghost stories about how awhite man cut off his wife’s head and buried her in the133swamp, and the headless body came out at night and went
stumbling around the yard, knocking over stuff because itcouldn’t see, and crying all the time for a comb. They talkedabout the women Blue had had, and the ﬁghts he’d been inwhen he was younger, about how he talked his way out ofgetting lynched once, and how others hadn’t.
Cholly loved Blue. Long after he was a man, he remem-
bered the good times they had had. How on a July 4at a
church picnic a family was about to break open a water-melon. Several children were standing around watching.Blue was hovering about on the periphery of the circle—afaint smile of anticipation softening his face. The father ofthe family lifted the melon high over his head—his big armslooked taller than the trees to Cholly, and the melon blottedout the sun. Tall, head forward, eyes fastened on a rock, hisarms higher than the pines, his hands holding a melon biggerthan the sun, he paused an instant to get his bearing andsecure his aim. Watching the ﬁgure etched against the brightblue sky, Cholly felt goose pimples popping along his armsand neck. He wondered if God looked like that. No. Godwas a nice old white man, with long white hair, ﬂowingwhite beard, and little blue eyes that looked sad when peopledied and mean when they were bad. It must be the devil wholooks like that—holding the world in his hands, ready todash it to the ground and spill the red guts so niggers couldeat the sweet, warm insides. If the devil did look like that,Cholly preferred him. He never felt anything thinking aboutGod, but just the idea of the devil excited him. And now thestrong, black devil was blotting out the sun and gettingready to split open the world.
Far away somebody was playing a mouth organ; theThe Bluest Eyemusic slithered over the cane ﬁelds and into the pine grove; it
spiraled around the tree trunks and mixed itself with thepine scent, so Cholly couldn’t tell the difference between thesound and the odor that hung about the heads of the people.
The man swung the melon down to the edge of a rock. A
soft cry of disappointment accompanied the sound ofsmashed rind. The break was a bad one. The melon wasjagged, and hunks of rind and red meat scattered on thegrass.
Blue jumped. “Aw—awww,” he moaned, “dere go da
heart.” His voice was both sad and pleased. Everybodylooked to see the big red chunk from the very center of themelon, free of rind and sparse of seed, which had rolled a lit-tle distance from Blue’s feet. He stooped to pick it up. Bloodred, its planes dull and blunted with sweetness, its edgesrigid with juice. Too obvious, almost obscene, in the joy itpromised.
“Go ’head, Blue,” the father laughed. “You can have it.”Blue smiled and walked away. Little children scrambled
for the pieces on the ground. Women picked out the seedsfor the smallest ones and broke off little bits of the meat forthemselves. Blue’s eye caught Cholly’s. He motioned to him.“Come on, boy. Le’s you and me eat the heart.”
Together the old man and the boy sat on the grass and
shared the heart of the watermelon. The nasty-sweet guts ofthe earth.
It was in the spring, a very chilly spring, that Aunt Jimmy
died of peach cobbler. She went to a camp meeting that tookplace after a rainstorm, and the damp wood of the bencheswas bad for her. For four or ﬁve days afterward, she feltpoorly. Friends came to see about her. Some made camomile135tea; others rubbed her with liniment. Miss Alice, her closest
friend, read the Bible to her. Still she was declining. Advicewas proliﬁc, if contradictory.
“Don’t eat no whites of eggs.”“Drink new milk.”“Chew on this root.”Aunt Jimmy ignored all but Miss Alice’s Bible reading.
She nodded in drowsy appreciation as the words from FirstCorinthians droned over her. Sweet amens fell from her lipsas she was chastised for all her sins. But her body would notrespond.
Finally it was decided to fetch M’Dear. M’Dear was a
quiet woman who lived in a shack near the woods. She wasa competent midwife and decisive diagnostician. Few couldremember when M’Dear was not around. In any illness thatcould not be handled by ordinary means—known cures,intuition, or endurance—the word was always, “FetchM’Dear.”
When she arrived at Aunt Jimmy’s house, Cholly was
amazed at the sight of her. He had always pictured her asshriveled and hunched over, for he knew she was very, veryold. But M’Dear loomed taller than the preacher whoaccompanied her. She must have been over six feet tall. Fourbig white knots of hair gave power and authority to her softblack face. Standing straight as a poker, she seemed to needher hickory stick not for support but for communication.She tapped it lightly on the ﬂoor as she looked down at AuntJimmy’s wrinkled face. She stroked the knob with the thumbof her right hand while she ran her left one over AuntJimmy’s body. The backs of her long ﬁngers she placed onthe patient’s cheek, then placed her palm on the forehead.She ran her ﬁngers through the sick woman’s hair, lightlyThe Bluest Eyescratching the scalp, and then looking at what the ﬁngernails
revealed. She lifted Aunt Jimmy’s hand and looked closely atit—ﬁngernails, back skin, the ﬂesh of the palm she pressedwith three ﬁngertips. Later she put her ear on Aunt Jimmy’schest and stomach to listen. At M’Dear’s request, thewomen pulled the slop jar from under the bed to show thestools. M’Dear tapped her stick while looking at them.
“Bury the slop jar and everything in it,” she said to the
women. To Aunt Jimmy she said, “You done caught cold inyour womb. Drink pot liquor and nothing else.”
“Will it pass?” asked Aunt Jimmy. “Is I’m gone be all
right?”
“I reckon.”M’Dear turned and left the room. The preacher put her in
his buggy to take her home.
That evening the women brought bowls of pot liquor
from black-eyed peas, from mustards, from cabbage, fromkale, from collards, from turnips, from beets, from greenbeans. Even the juice from a boiling hog jowl.
Two evenings later Aunt Jimmy had gained much
strength. When Miss Alice and Mrs. Gaines stopped in tocheck on her, they remarked on her improvement. The three women sat talking about various miseries they hadhad, their cure or abatement, what had helped. Over andover again they returned to Aunt Jimmy’s condition.Repeating its cause, what could have been done to preventthe misery from taking hold, and M’Dear’s infallibility.Their voices blended into a threnody of nostalgia aboutpain. Rising and falling, complex in harmony, uncertain inpitch, but constant in the recitative of pain. They hugged thememories of illnesses to their bosoms. They licked their lipsand clucked their tongues in fond remembrance of pains137they had endured—childbirth, rheumatism, croup, sprains,
backaches, piles. All of the bruises they had collected frommoving about the earth—harvesting, cleaning, hoisting,pitching, stooping, kneeling, picking—always with youngones underfoot.
But they had been young once. The odor of their armpits
and haunches had mingled into a lovely musk; their eyes hadbeen furtive, their lips relaxed, and the delicate turn of theirheads on those slim black necks had been like nothing otherthan a doe’s. Their laughter had been more touch thansound.
Then they had grown. Edging into life from the back
door. Becoming. Everybody in the world was in a positionto give them orders. White women said, “Do this.” Whitechildren said, “Give me that.” White men said, “Comehere.” Black men said, “Lay down.” The only people theyneed not take orders from were black children and eachother. But they took all of that and re-created it in their ownimage. They ran the houses of white people, and knew it.When white men beat their men, they cleaned up the bloodand went home to receive abuse from the victim. They beattheir children with one hand and stole for them with theother. The hands that felled trees also cut umbilical cords;the hands that wrung the necks of chickens and butcheredhogs also nudged African violets into bloom; the arms thatloaded sheaves, bales, and sacks rocked babies into sleep.They patted biscuits into ﬂaky ovals of innocence—andshrouded the dead. They plowed all day and came home tonestle like plums under the limbs of their men. The legs thatstraddled a mule’s back were the same ones that straddledtheir men’s hips. And the difference was all the differencethere was.The Bluest EyeThen they were old. Their bodies honed, their odor sour.
Squatting in a cane ﬁeld, stooping in a cotton ﬁeld, kneelingby a river bank, they had carried a world on their heads.They had given over the lives of their own children and ten-dered their grandchildren. With relief they wrapped theirheads in rags, and their breasts in ﬂannel; eased their feetinto felt. They were through with lust and lactation, beyondtears and terror. They alone could walk the roads ofMississippi, the lanes of Georgia, the ﬁelds of Alabamaunmolested. They were old enough to be irritable when andwhere they chose, tired enough to look forward to death,disinterested enough to accept the idea of pain while ignor-ing the presence of pain. They were, in fact and at last, free.And the lives of these old black women were synthesized intheir eyes—a purée of tragedy and humor, wickedness andserenity, truth and fantasy.
They chattered far into the night. Cholly listened and
grew sleepy. The lullaby of grief enveloped him, rocked him,and at last numbed him. In his sleep the foul odor of an oldwoman’s stools turned into the healthy smell of horse shit,and the voices of the three women were muted into thepleasant notes of a mouth organ. He was aware, in his sleep,of being curled up in a chair, his hands tucked between histhighs. In a dream his penis changed into a long hickorystick, and the hands caressing it were the hands of M’Dear.
On a wet Saturday night, before Aunt Jimmy felt strong
enough to get out of the bed, Essie Foster brought her apeach cobbler. The old lady ate a piece, and the next morn-ing when Cholly went to empty the slop jar, she was dead.Her mouth was a slackened O, and her hands, those longﬁngers with a man’s hard nails, having done their laying by,could now be dainty on the sheet. One open eye looked at139him as if to say, “Mind how you take holt of that jar, boy.”
Cholly stared back, unable to move, until a ﬂy settled at thecorner of her mouth. He fanned it away angrily, looked backat the eye, and did its bidding.
Aunt Jimmy’s funeral was the ﬁrst Cholly had ever
attended. As a member of the family, one of the bereaved, hewas the object of a great deal of attention. The ladies hadcleaned the house, aired everything out, notiﬁed everybody,and stitched together what looked like a white weddingdress for Aunt Jimmy, a maiden lady, to wear when she metJesus. They even produced a dark suit, white shirt, and tiefor Cholly. The husband of one of them cut his hair. He wasenclosed in fastidious tenderness. Nobody talked to him;that is, they treated him like the child he was, never engaginghim in serious conversation; but they anticipated wishes henever had: meals appeared, hot water for the wooden tub,clothes laid out. At the wake he was allowed to fall asleep,and arms carried him to bed. Only on the third day after thedeath—the day of the funeral—did he have to share thespotlight. Aunt Jimmy’s people came from nearby townsand farms. Her brother O. V., his children and wife, and lotsof cousins. But Cholly was still the major ﬁgure, because hewas “Jimmy’s boy, the last thing she loved,” and “the onewho found her.” The solicitude of the women, the head patsof the men, pleased Cholly, and the creamy conversationsfascinated him.
“What’d she die from?”“Essie’s pie.”“Don’t say?”“Uh-huh. She was doing ﬁne, I saw her the very day
before. Said she wanted me to bring her some black threadThe Bluest Eyeto patch some things for the boy. I should of known just
from her wanting black thread that was a sign.”
“Sure was.”“Just like Emma. ’Member? She kept asking for thread.
Dropped dead that very evening.”
“Yeah. Well, she was determined to have it. Kept on
reminding me. I told her I had some to home, but naw, shewanted it new. So I sent Li’l June to get some that very morn-ing when she was laying dead. I was just ﬁxing to bring itover, ’long with a piece of sweet bread. You know how shecraved my sweet bread.”
“Sure did. Always bragged on it. She was a good friend to
you.”
“I believe it. Well, I had no more got my clothes on when
Sally bust in the door hollering about how Cholly here hadbeen over to Miss Alice saying she was dead. You could haveknocked me over, I tell you.”
“Guess Essie feels mighty bad.”“Oh, Lord, yes. But I told her the Lord giveth and the
Lord taketh away. Wasn’t her fault none. She makes goodpeach pies. But she bound to believe it was the pie did it, andI ’spect she right.”
“Well, she shouldn’t worry herself none ’bout that. She
was just doing what we all would of done.”
“Yeah. ’Cause I was sure wrapping up that sweet bread,
and that could of done it too.”
“I doubts that. Sweet bread is pure. But a pie is the worse
thing to give anybody ailing. I’m surprised Jimmy didn’tknow better.”
“If she did, she wouldn’t let on. She would have tried to
please. You know how she was. So good.”141“I’ll say. Did she leave anything?”
“Not even a pocket handkerchief. The house belongs to
some white folks in Clarksville.”
“Oh, yeah? I thought she owned it.”“May have at one time. But not no more. I hear the insur-
ance folks been down talking to her brother.”
“How much do it come to?”“Eighty-ﬁve dollars, I hear.”“That all?”“Can she get in the ground on that?”“Don’t see how. When my daddy died last year this April
it costed one hundred and ﬁfty dollars. ’Course, we had tohave everything just so. Now Jimmy’s people may all have tochip in. That undertaker that lays out black folks ain’t nonetoo cheap.”
“Seems a shame. She been paying on that insurance all
her life.”
“Don’t I know?”“Well, what about the boy? What he gone do?”“Well, caint nobody ﬁnd that mama, so Jimmy’s brother
gone take him back to his place. They say he got a nice place.Inside toilet and everything.”
“That’s nice. He seems like a good Christian man. And
the boy need a man’s hand.”
“What time’s the funeral?”“Two clock. She ought to be in the ground by four.”“Where’s the banquet? I heard Essie wanted it at her
house.”
“Naw, it’s at Jimmy’s. Her brother wanted it so.”“Well, it will be a big one. Everybody liked old Jimmy.
Sure will miss her in the pew.”
The funeral banquet was a peal of joy after the thunder-The Bluest Eyeous beauty of the funeral. It was like a street tragedy with
spontaneity tucked softly into the corners of a highly formalstructure. The deceased was the tragic hero, the survivorsthe innocent victims; there was the omnipresence of thedeity, strophe and antistrophe of the chorus of mourners ledby the preacher. There was grief over the waste of life, thestunned wonder at the ways of God, and the restoration oforder in nature at the graveyard.
Thus the banquet was the exultation, the harmony, the
acceptance of physical frailty, joy in the termination of mis-ery. Laughter, relief, a steep hunger for food.
Cholly had not yet fully realized his aunt was dead.
Everything was so interesting. Even at the graveyard he feltnothing but curiosity, and when his turn had come to viewthe body at the church, he had put his hand out to touch thecorpse to see if it were really ice cold like everybody said. Buthe drew his hand back quickly. Aunt Jimmy looked so pri-vate, and it seemed wrong somehow to disturb that privacy.He had trudged back to his pew dry-eyed amid tearfulshrieks and shouts of others, wondering if he should try tocry.
Back in his house, he was free to join in the gaiety and
enjoy what he really felt—a kind of carnival spirit. He ategreedily and felt good enough to try to get to know hiscousins. There was some question, according to the adults,as to whether they were his real cousins or not, since Jimmy’sbrother O. V. was only a half-brother, and Cholly’s motherhad been the daughter of Jimmy’s sister, but that sister wasfrom the second marriage of Jimmy’s father, and O. V. wasfrom the ﬁrst marriage.
One of these cousins interested Cholly in particular. He
was about ﬁfteen or sixteen years old. Cholly went outside143and found the boy standing with some others near the tub
where Aunt Jimmy used to boil her clothes.
He ventured a tentative “Hey.” They responded with
another. The ﬁfteen-year-old named Jake offered Cholly arolled-up cigarette. Cholly took it, but when he held the cig-arette at arm’s length and stuck the tip of it into the matchﬂame, instead of putting it in his mouth and drawing on it,they laughed at him. Shamefaced, he threw the cigarettedown. He felt it important to do something to reinstate him-self with Jake. So when he asked Cholly if he knew any girls,Cholly said, “Sure.”
All the girls Cholly knew were at the banquet, and he
pointed to a cluster of them standing, hanging, draping onthe back porch. Darlene too. Cholly hoped Jake wouldn’tpick her.
“Let’s get some and walk around,” said Jake.The two boys sauntered over to the porch. Cholly didn’t
know how to begin. Jake wrapped his legs around the rick-ety porch rail and just sat there staring off into space asthough he had no interest in them at all. He was letting themlook him over, and guardedly evaluating them in return.
The girls pretended they didn’t see the boys and kept on
chattering. Soon their talk got sharp; the gentle teasing theyhad been engaged in with each other changed to bitchiness,a serious kind of making fun. That was Jake’s clue; the girlswere reacting to him. They had gotten a whiff of his man-hood and were shivering for a place in his attention.
Jake left the porch rail and walked right up to a girl
named Suky, the one who had been most bitter in her mak-ing fun.
“Want to show me ’round?” He didn’t even smile.Cholly held his breath, waiting for Suky to shut Jake up.The Bluest EyeShe was good at that, and well known for her sharp tongue.
To his enormous surprise, she readily agreed, and even low-ered her lashes. Taking courage, Cholly turned to Darleneand said, “Come on ’long. We just going down to the gully.”He waited for her to screw up her face and say no, or whatfor, or some such thing. His feelings about her were mostlyfear—fear that she would not like him, and fear that shewould.
His second fear materialized. She smiled and jumped
down the three leaning steps to join him. Her eyes were fullof compassion, and Cholly remembered that he was thebereaved.
“If you want to,” she said, “but not too far. Mama said
we got to leave early, and it’s getting dark.”
The four of them moved away. Some of the other boys
had come to the porch and were about to begin that partlyhostile, partly indifferent, partly desperate mating dance.Suky, Jake, Darlene, and Cholly walked through severalbackyards until they came to an open ﬁeld. They ran acrossit and came to a dry riverbed lined with green. The object ofthe walk was a wild vineyard where the muscadine grew.Too new, too tight to have much sugar, they were eaten any-way. None of them wanted—not then—the grape’s easyrelinquishing of all its dark juice. The restraint, the holdingoff, the promise of sweetness that had yet to unfold, excitedthem more than full ripeness would have done. At last theirteeth were on edge, and the boys diverted themselves by pelt-ing the girls with the grapes. Their slim black boy wristsmade G clefs in the air as they executed the tosses. The chasetook Cholly and Darlene away from the lip of the gully, andwhen they paused for breath, Jake and Suky were nowherein sight. Darlene’s white cotton dress was stained with juice.145Her big blue hair bow had come undone, and the sundown
breeze was picking it up and ﬂuttering it about her head.They were out of breath and sank down in the green-and-purple grass on the edge of the pine woods.
Cholly lay on his back panting. His mouth full of the
taste of muscadine, listening to the pine needles rustlingloudly in their anticipation of rain. The smell of promisedrain, pine, and muscadine made him giddy. The sun hadgone and pulled away its shreds of light. Turning his head tosee where the moon was. Cholly caught sight of Darlene inmoonlight behind him. She was huddled into a D—armsencircling drawn-up knees, on which she rested her head.Cholly could see her bloomers and the muscles of her youngthighs.
“We bed’ get on back,” he said.“Yeah.” She stretched her legs ﬂat on the ground and
began to retie her hair ribbon. “Mama gone whup me.”
“Naw she ain’t.”“Uh-huh. She told me she would if I get dirty.”“You ain’t dirty.”“I am too. Looka that.” She dropped her hands from the
ribbon and smoothed out a place on her dress where thegrape stains were heaviest.
Cholly felt sorry for her; it was just as much his fault.
Suddenly he realized that Aunt Jimmy was dead, for hemissed the fear of being whipped. There was nobody to do itexcept Uncle O. V., and he was the bereaved too.
“Let me,” he said. He rose to his knees facing her and
tried to tie her ribbon. Darlene put her hands under his openshirt and rubbed the damp tight skin. When he looked at herin surprise, she stopped and laughed. He smiled and con-The Bluest Eyetinued knotting the bow. She put her hands back under his
shirt.
“Hold still,” he said. “How I gone get this?”She tickled his ribs with her ﬁngertips. He giggled and
grabbed his rib cage. They were on top of each other in amoment. She corkscrewing her hands into his clothes. Hereturning the play, digging into the neck of her dress, andthen under her dress. When he got his hand in her bloomers,she suddenly stopped laughing and looked serious. Cholly,frightened, was about to take his hand away, but she held hiswrist so he couldn’t move it. He examined her then with hisﬁngers, and she kissed his face and mouth. Cholly found hermuscadine-lipped mouth distracting. Darlene released hishead, shifted her body, and pulled down her pants. Aftersome trouble with the buttons, Cholly dropped his pantsdown to his knees. Their bodies began to make sense to him,and it was not as difﬁcult as he had thought it would be. Shemoaned a little, but the excitement collecting inside himmade him close his eyes and regard her moans as no morethan pine sighs over his head. Just as he felt an explosionthreaten, Darlene froze and cried out. He thought he hadhurt her, but when he looked at her face, she was staringwildly at something over his shoulder. He jerked around.
There stood two white men. One with a spirit lamp, the
other with a ﬂashlight. There was no mistake about theirbeing white; he could smell it. Cholly jumped, trying tokneel, stand, and get his pants up all in one motion. The menhad long guns.
“Hee hee hee heeeee.” The snicker was a long asthmatic
cough.
The other raced the ﬂashlight all over Cholly and Darlene.147“Get on wid it, nigger,” said the ﬂashlight one.
“Sir?” said Cholly, trying to ﬁnd a buttonhole.“I said, get on wid it. An’ make it good, nigger, make it
good.”
There was no place for Cholly’s eyes to go. They slid
about furtively searching for shelter, while his body re-mained paralyzed. The ﬂashlight man lifted his gun downfrom his shoulder, and Cholly heard the clop of metal. Hedropped back to his knees. Darlene had her head averted,her eyes staring out of the lamplight into the surroundingdarkness and looking almost unconcerned, as though theyhad no part in the drama taking place around them. With aviolence born of total helplessness, he pulled her dress up,lowered his trousers and underwear.
“Hee hee hee hee heeeeee.”Darlene put her hands over her face as Cholly began to
simulate what had gone on before. He could do no morethan make-believe. The ﬂashlight made a moon on hisbehind.
“Hee hee hee hee heeee.”“Come on, coon. Faster. You ain’t doing nothing for
her.”
“Hee hee hee hee heeee.”Cholly, moving faster, looked at Darlene. He hated her.
He almost wished he could do it—hard, long, and painfully,he hated her so much. The ﬂashlight wormed its way into hisguts and turned the sweet taste of muscadine into rottenfetid bile. He stared at Darlene’s hands covering her face inthe moon and lamplight. They looked like baby claws.
“Hee hee hee hee heee.”Some dogs howled. “Thas them. Thas them. I know thas
Old Honey.”The Bluest Eye“Yep,” said the spirit lamp.
“Come on.” The ﬂashlight turned away, and one of them
whistled to Honey.
“Wait,” said the spirit lamp, “the coon ain’t comed yet.”“Well, he have to come on his own time. Good luck, coon
baby.”
They crushed the pine needles underfoot. Cholly could
hear them whistling for a long time, and then the dogs’answer no longer a howl, but warm excited yelps of recogni-tion.
Cholly raised himself and in silence buttoned his trousers.
Darlene did not move. Cholly wanted to strangle her, butinstead he touched her leg with his foot. “We got to get, girl.Come on!”
She reached for her underwear with her eyes closed, and
could not ﬁnd them. The two of them patted about in themoonlight for the panties. When she found them, she putthem on with the movements of an old woman. Theywalked away from the pine woods toward the road. He infront, she plopping along behind. It started to rain. “That’sgood,” Cholly thought. “It will explain away our clothes.”
When they got back to the house, some ten or twelve
guests were still there. Jake was gone, Suky too. Some peoplehad gone back for more helpings of food—potato pie, ribs.All were engrossed in early-night reminiscences aboutdreams, ﬁgures, premonitions. Their stuffed comfort wasnarcotic and had produced recollections and fabrications ofhallucinations.
Cholly and Darlene’s entrance produced only a mild stir.“Ya’ll soaked, ain’t you?”Darlene’s mother was only vaguely fussy. She had eaten
and drunk too much. Her shoes were under her chair, and149the side snaps of her dress were opened. “Girl. Come on in
here. Thought I told you ...”
Some of the guests thought they would wait for the rain
to slacken. Others, who had come in wagons, thoughtthey’d best leave now. Cholly went into the little storeroomwhich had been made into a bedroom for him. Three infantswere sleeping on his cot. He took off his rain- and pine-soaked clothes and put on his coveralls. He didn’t knowwhere to go. Aunt Jimmy’s room was out of the question,and Uncle O. V. and his wife would be using it later anyway.He took a quilt from a trunk, spread it on the ﬂoor, and laydown. Somebody was brewing coffee, and he had a sharpcraving for it, just before falling asleep.
The next day was cleaning-out day, settling accounts, dis-
tributing Aunt Jimmy’s goods. Mouths were set in down-ward crescents, eyes veiled, feet tentative.
Cholly ﬂoated about aimlessly, doing chores as he was
told. All the glamour and warmth the adults had given himon the previous day were replaced by a sharpness thatagreed with his mood. He could think only of the ﬂashlight,the muscadines, and Darlene’s hands. And when he was notthinking of them, the vacancy in his head was like the spaceleft by a newly pulled tooth still conscious of the rottennessthat had once ﬁlled it. Afraid of running into Darlene, hewould not go far from the house, but neither could heendure the atmosphere of his dead Aunt’s house. The pick-ing through her things, the comments on the “condition” ofher goods. Sullen, irritable, he cultivated his hatred ofDarlene. Never did he once consider directing his hatredtoward the hunters. Such an emotion would have destroyedhim. They were big, white, armed men. He was small, black,helpless. His subconscious knew what his conscious mindThe Bluest Eyedid not guess—that hating them would have consumed him,
burned him up like a piece of soft coal, leaving only ﬂakes ofash and a question mark of smoke. He was, in time, to dis-cover that hatred of white men—but not now. Not in impo-tence but later, when the hatred could ﬁnd sweet expression.For now, he hated the one who had created the situation, theone who bore witness to his failure, his impotence. The onewhom he had not been able to protect, to spare, to coverfrom the round moon glow of the ﬂashlight. The hee-hee-hee’s. He recalled Darlene’s dripping hair ribbon, ﬂappingagainst her face as they walked back in silence in the rain.The loathing that galloped through him made him tremble.There was no one to talk to. Old Blue was too drunk toooften these days to make sense. Besides, Cholly doubted if hecould reveal his shame to Blue. He would have to lie a littleto tell Blue, Blue the woman-killer. It seemed to him thatlonely was much better than alone.
The day Cholly’s uncle was ready to leave, when every-
thing was packed, when the quarrels about who gets whathad seethed down to a sticking gravy on everybody’s tongue,Cholly sat on the back porch waiting. It had occurred to himthat Darlene might be pregnant. It was a wildly irrational,completely uninformed idea, but the fear it produced wascomplete enough.
He had to get away. Never mind the fact that he was
leaving that very day. A town or two away was not farenough, especially since he did not like or trust his uncle,and Darlene’s mother could surely ﬁnd him, and Uncle O. V. would turn him over to her. Cholly knew it waswrong to run out on a pregnant girl, and recalled, with sympathy, that his father had done just that. Now he under-stood. He knew then what he must do—ﬁnd his father. His151father would understand. Aunt Jimmy said he had gone to
Macon.
With no more thought than a chick leaving its shell, he
stepped off the porch. He had gotten a little way when heremembered the treasure; Aunt Jimmy had left something,and he had forgotten all about it. In a stove ﬂue no longerused, she had hidden a little meal bag which she called hertreasure. He slipped into the house and found the roomempty. Digging into the ﬂue, he encountered webs and soot,and then the soft bag. He sorted the money; fourteen one-dollar bills, two two-dollar bills, and lots of silverchange ...twenty-three dollars in all. Surely that would 
be enough to get to Macon. What a good, strong-soundingword, Macon.
Running away from home for a Georgia black boy was
not a great problem. You just sneaked away and startedwalking. When night came you slept in a barn, if there wereno dogs, a cane ﬁeld, or an empty sawmill. You ate from theground and bought root beer and licorice in little countrystores. There was always an easy tale of woe to tell inquiringblack adults, and whites didn’t care, unless they were look-ing for sport.
When he was several days away, he could go to the back
door of nice houses and tell the black cook or white mistressthat he wanted a job weeding, plowing, picking, cleaning,and that he lived nearby. A week or more there, and he couldtake off. He lived this way through the turn of summer, andonly the following October did he reach a town big enoughto have a regular bus station. Dry-mouthed with excitementand apprehension, he went to the colored side of the counterto buy his ticket.
“How much to Macon, sir?”The Bluest Eye“Eleven dollars. Five-ﬁfty for children under twelve.”
Cholly had twelve dollars and four cents.“How old you be?”“Just on twelve, sir, but my mama only give me ten dol-
lars.”
“You jest about the biggest twelve I ever seed.”“Please, sir, I got to get to Macon. My mama’s sick.”“Thought you said you mama give you ten dollars.”“That’s my play mama. My real mama is in Macon, sir.”“I reckon I knows a lying nigger when I sees one, but jest
in case you ain’t, jest in case one of them mammies is reallydyin’ and wants to see her little old smoke before she meetsher maker, I gone do it.”
Cholly heard nothing. The insults were part of the nui-
sances of life, like lice. He was happier than he had everremembered being, except that time with Blue and thewatermelon. The bus wasn’t leaving for four hours, and theminutes of those hours struggled like gnats on ﬂy paper—dying slow, exhausted with the ﬁght to stay alive. Chollywas afraid to stir, even to relieve himself. The bus mightleave while he was gone. Finally, rigid with constipation, heboarded the bus to Macon.
He found a window seat in the back all to himself, and
all of Georgia slid before his eyes, until the sun shrugged outof sight. Even in the dark, he hungered to see, and only afterthe ﬁercest ﬁght to keep his eyes open did he fall asleep.When he awoke it was very well into day, and a fat blacklady was nudging him with a biscuit gashed with coldbacon. With the taste of bacon still in his teeth, they sidledinto Macon.
...153At the end of the alley he could see men clustered like grapes.
One large whooping voice spiraled over the heads of thebended forms. The kneeling forms, the leaning forms, allintent on one ground spot. As he came closer, he inhaled arife and stimulating man smell. The men were gathered, justas the man in the pool hall had said, for and about dice andmoney. Each ﬁgure was decorated some way with the slightpieces of green. Some of them had separated their money,folded the bills around their ﬁngers, clenched the ﬁngers intoﬁsts, so the neat ends of the money stuck out in a blend ofdaintiness and violence. Others had stacked their bills,creased them down the middle, and held the wad as thoughthey were about to deal cards. Still others had left theirmoney in loosely crumpled balls. One man had money stick-ing out from under his cap. Another stroked his bills with athumb and foreﬁnger. There was more money in those blackhands than Cholly had ever seen before. He shared theirexcitement, and the dry-mouthed apprehension on meetinghis father gave way to the saliva ﬂow of excitement. Heglanced at the faces, looking for the one who might be hisfather. How would he know him? Would he look like alarger version of himself? At that moment Cholly could notremember what his own self looked like. He only knew hewas fourteen years old, black, and already six feet tall. Hesearched the faces and saw only eyes, pleading eyes, coldeyes, eyes gone ﬂat with malice, others laced with fear—allfocused on the movement of a pair of dice that one man wasthrowing, snatching up, and throwing again. Chanting akind of litany to which the others responded, rubbing thedice as though they were two hot coals, he whispered tothem. Then with a whoop the cubes ﬂew from his hand to achorus of amazements and disappointments. Then theThe Bluest Eyethrower scooped up money, and someone shouted, “Take it
and crawl, you water dog, you, the best I know.” There wassome laughter, and a noticeable release of tension, duringwhich some men exchanged money.
Cholly tapped an old white-haired man on the back.“Can you tell me is Samson Fuller ’round here some-
where?”
“Fuller?” The name was familiar to the man’s tongue. “I
don’t know, he here somewhere. They he is. In the brownjacket.” The man pointed.
A man in a light-brown jacket stood at the far end of the
group. He was gesturing in a quarrelsome, agitated mannerwith another man. Both of them had folded their faces inanger. Cholly edged around to where they stood, hardlybelieving he was at the end of his journey. There was hisfather, a man like any other man, but there indeed were hiseyes, his mouth, his whole head. His shoulders lurkedbeneath that jacket, his voice, his hands—all real. Theyexisted, really existed, somewhere. Right here. Cholly hadalways thought of his father as a giant of a man, so when hewas very close it was with a shock that he discovered that hewas taller than his father. In fact, he was staring at a baldingspot on his father’s head, which he suddenly wanted tostroke. While thus fascinated by the pitiable clean spacehedged around by neglected tufts of wool, the man turned ahard, belligerent face to him.
“What you want, boy?”“Uh. I mean . . . is you Samson Fuller?”
“Who sent you?”“Huh?”“You Melba’s boy?”“No, sir, I’m ...”  Cholly blinked. He could not remem-155ber his mother’s name. Had he ever known it? What could
he say? Whose boy was he? He couldn’t say, “I’m your boy.”That sounded disrespectful.
The man was impatient. “Something wrong with your
head? Who told you to come after me?”
“Nobody.” Cholly’s hands were sweating. The man’s
eyes frightened him. “I just though t...I  m ean, I was just
wandering around, and, uh, my name is Choll y.... ”
But Fuller had turned back to the game that was about to
begin anew. He bent down to toss a bill on the ground, andwaited for a throw. When it was gone, he stood up and in avexed and whiny voice shouted at Cholly, “Tell that bitchshe get her money. Now, get the fuck outta my face!”
Cholly was a long time picking his foot up from the
ground. He was trying to back up and walk away. Onlywith extreme effort could he get the ﬁrst muscle to cooper-ate. When it did, he walked back up the alley, out of itsshade, toward the blazing light of the street. As he emergedinto the sun, he felt something in his legs give way. Anorange crate with a picture of clasping hands pasted on itsside was upended on the sidewalk. Cholly sat down on it.The sunshine dropped like honey on his head. A horse-drawn fruit wagon went by, its driver singing: “Fresh fromthe vine, sweet as sugar, red as wine.”
Noises seemed to increase in volume. The clic-cloc of the
women’s heels, the laughter of idling men in doorways.There was a streetcar somewhere. Cholly sat. He knew if hewas very still he would be all right. But then the trace of painedged his eyes, and he had to use everything to send it away.If he was very still, he thought, and kept his eyes on onething, the tears would not come. So he sat in the drippinghoney sun, pulling every nerve and muscle into service toThe Bluest Eyestop the fall of water from his eyes. While straining in this
way, focusing every erg of energy on his eyes, his bowels sud-denly opened up, and before he could realize what he knew,liquid stools were running down his legs. At the mouth ofthe alley where his father was, on an orange crate in the sun,on a street full of grown men and women, he had soiled him-self like a baby.
In panic he wondered should he wait there, not moving
until nighttime? No. His father would surely emerge and seehim and laugh. Oh, Lord. He would laugh. Everybodywould laugh. There was only one thing to do.
Cholly ran down the street, aware only of silence.
People’s mouths moved, their feet moved, a car jugged by—but with no sound. A door slammed in perfect soundless-ness. His own feet made no sound. The air seemed tostrangle him, hold him back. He was pushing through aworld of invisible pine sap that threatened to smother him.Still he ran, seeing only silent moving things, until he came tothe end of buildings, the beginning of open space, and sawthe Ocmulgee River winding ahead. He scooted down agravelly slope to a pier jutting out over the shallow water.Finding the deepest shadow under the pier, he crouched in it,behind one of the posts. He remained knotted there in fetalposition, paralyzed, his ﬁsts covering his eyes, for a longtime. No sound, no sight, only darkness and heat and thepress of his knuckles on his eyelids. He even forgot hismessed-up trousers.
Evening came. The dark, the warmth, the quiet, enclosed
Cholly like the skin and ﬂesh of an elderberry protecting itsown seed.
Cholly stirred. The ache in his head was all he felt. Soon,
like bright bits of glass, the events of that afternoon cut into157him. At ﬁrst he saw only money in black ﬁngers, then he
thought he was sitting on an uncomfortable chair, but whenhe looked, it turned out to be the head of a man, a head witha bald spot the size of an orange. When ﬁnally these bitsmerged into full memory, Cholly began to smell himself. Hestood up and found himself weak, trembling, and dizzy. Heleaned for a moment on the pier post, then took off hispants, underwear, socks, and shoes. He rubbed handfuls ofdirt on his shoes; then he crawled to the river edge. He hadto ﬁnd the water’s beginning with his hands, for he could not see it clearly. Slowly he swirled his clothes in the waterand rubbed them until he thought they were clean. Backnear his post, he took off his shirt and wrapped it around hiswaist, then spread his trousers and underwear on theground. He squatted down and picked at the rotted wood ofthe pier. Suddenly he thought of his Aunt Jimmy, her asafet-ida bag, her four gold teeth, and the purple rag she worearound her head. With a longing that almost split him open,he thought of her handing him a bit of smoked hock out ofher dish. He remembered just how she held it—clumsy-like,in three ﬁngers, but with so much affection. No words, justpicking up a bit of meat and holding it out to him. And thenthe tears rushed down his cheeks, to make a bouquet underhis chin.
Three women are leaning out of two windows. They see the
long clean neck of a new young boy and call to him. He goesto where they are. Inside, it is dark and warm. They give himlemonade in a Mason jar. As he drinks, their eyes ﬂoat up to him through the bottom of the jar, through the slickThe Bluest Eyesweet water. They give him back his manhood, which he
takes aimlessly.
The pieces of Cholly’s life could become coherent only in
the head of a musician. Only those who talk their talkthrough the gold of curved metal, or in the touch of black-and-white rectangles and taut skins and strings echoingfrom wooden corridors, could give true form to his life.Only they would know how to connect the heart of a redwatermelon to the asafetida bag to the muscadine to theﬂashlight on his behind to the ﬁsts of money to the lemonadein a Mason jar to a man called Blue and come up with whatall of that meant in joy, in pain, in anger, in love, and give itits ﬁnal and pervading ache of freedom. Only a musicianwould sense, know, without even knowing that he knew,that Cholly was free. Dangerously free. Free to feel whateverhe felt—fear, guilt, shame, love, grief, pity. Free to be tenderor violent, to whistle or weep. Free to sleep in doorways orbetween the white sheets of a singing woman. Free to take ajob, free to leave it. He could go to jail and not feel impris-oned, for he had already seen the furtiveness in the eyes ofhis jailer, free to say, “No, suh,” and smile, for he hadalready killed three white men. Free to take a woman’sinsults, for his body had already conquered hers. Free evento knock her in the head, for he had already cradled thathead in his arms. Free to be gentle when she was sick, ormop her ﬂoor, for she knew what and where his malenesswas. He was free to drink himself into a silly helplessness,for he had already been a gandy dancer, done thirty days ona chain gang, and picked a woman’s bullet out of the calf ofhis leg. He was free to live his fantasies, and free even to die,the how and the when of which held no interest for him. In159those days, Cholly was truly free. Abandoned in a junk heap
by his mother, rejected for a crap game by his father, therewas nothing more to lose. He was alone with his own per-ceptions and appetites, and they alone interested him.
It was in this godlike state that he met Pauline Williams.
And it was Pauline, or rather marrying her, that did for himwhat the ﬂashlight did not do. The constantness, varietyless-ness, the sheer weight of sameness drove him to despair andfroze his imagination. To be required to sleep with the samewoman forever was a curious and unnatural idea to him; tobe expected to dredge up enthusiasms for old acts, and rou-tine ploys; he wondered at the arrogance of the female.When he had met Pauline in Kentucky, she was hanging overa fence scratching herself with a broken foot. The neatness,the charm, the joy he awakened in her made him want tonest with her. He had yet to discover what destroyed thatdesire. But he did not dwell on it. He thought rather of what-ever had happened to the curiosity he used to feel. Nothing,nothing, interested him now. Not himself, not other people.Only in drink was there some break, some ﬂoodlight, andwhen that closed, there was oblivion.
But the aspect of married life that dumbfounded him and
rendered him totally disfunctional was the appearance ofchildren. Having no idea of how to raise children, and hav-ing never watched any parent raise himself, he could noteven comprehend what such a relationship should be. Hadhe been interested in the accumulation of things, he couldhave thought of them as his material heirs; had he needed toprove himself to some nameless “others,” he could havewanted them to excel in his own image and for his own sake.Had he not been alone in the world since he was thirteen,knowing only a dying old woman who felt responsible forThe Bluest Eyehim, but whose age, sex, and interests were so remote from
his own, he might have felt a stable connection between him-self and the children. As it was, he reacted to them, and hisreactions were based on what he felt at the moment.
So it was on a Saturday afternoon, in the thin light of spring,
he staggered home reeling drunk and saw his daughter in thekitchen.
She was washing dishes. Her small back hunched over
the sink. Cholly saw her dimly and could not tell what hesaw or what he felt. Then he became aware that he wasuncomfortable; next he felt the discomfort dissolve intopleasure. The sequence of his emotions was revulsion, guilt,pity, then love. His revulsion was a reaction to her young,helpless, hopeless presence. Her back hunched that way; herhead to one side as though crouching from a permanent andunrelieved blow. Why did she have to look so whipped? Shewas a child—unburdened—why wasn’t she happy? Theclear statement of her misery was an accusation. He wantedto break her neck—but tenderly. Guilt and impotence rosein a bilious duet. What could he do for her—ever? What giveher? What say to her? What could a burned-out black mansay to the hunched back of his eleven-year-old daughter? Ifhe looked into her face, he would see those haunted, lovingeyes. The hauntedness would irritate him—the love wouldmove him to fury. How dare she love him? Hadn’t she anysense at all? What was he supposed to do about that? Returnit? How? What could his calloused hands produce to makeher smile? What of his knowledge of the world and of lifecould be useful to her? What could his heavy arms andbefuddled brain accomplish that would earn him his own161respect, that would in turn allow him to accept her love? His
hatred of her slimed in his stomach and threatened tobecome vomit. But just before the puke moved from antici-pation to sensation, she shifted her weight and stood on onefoot scratching the back of her calf with her toe. It was aquiet and pitiful gesture. Her hands were going around andaround a frying pan, scraping ﬂecks of black into cold,greasy dishwater. The timid, tucked-in look of the scratchingtoe—that was what Pauline was doing the ﬁrst time he sawher in Kentucky. Leaning over a fence staring at nothing inparticular. The creamy toe of her bare foot scratching a vel-vet leg. It was such a small and simple gesture, but it ﬁlledhim then with a wondering softness. Not the usual lust topart tight legs with his own, but a tenderness, a protective-ness. A desire to cover her foot with his hand and gently nib-ble away the itch from the calf with his teeth. He did it then,and started Pauline into laughter. He did it now.
The tenderness welled up in him, and he sank to his
knees, his eyes on the foot of his daughter. Crawling on allfours toward her, he raised his hand and caught the foot inan upward stroke. Pecola lost her balance and was about tocareen to the ﬂoor. Cholly raised his other hand to her hipsto save her from falling. He put his head down and nibbledat the back of her leg. His mouth trembled at the ﬁrm sweet-ness of the ﬂesh. He closed his eyes, letting his ﬁngers diginto her waist. The rigidness of her shocked body, the silenceof her stunned throat, was better than Pauline’s easy laugh-ter had been. The confused mixture of his memories ofPauline and the doing of a wild and forbidden thing excitedhim, and a bolt of desire ran down his genitals, giving itlength, and softening the lips of his anus. Surrounding all ofthis lust was a border of politeness. He wanted to fuck The Bluest Eyeher—tenderly. But the tenderness would not hold. The tight-
ness of her vagina was more than he could bear. His soulseemed to slip down to his guts and ﬂy out into her, and thegigantic thrust he made into her then provoked the onlysound she made—a hollow suck of air in the back of herthroat. Like the rapid loss of air from a circus balloon.
Following the disintegration—the falling away—of sex-
ual desire, he was conscious of her wet, soapy hands on hiswrists, the ﬁngers clenching, but whether her grip was froma hopeless but stubborn struggle to be free, or from someother emotion, he could not tell.
Removing himself from her was so painful to him he cut
it short and snatched his genitals out of the dry harbor of hervagina. She appeared to have fainted. Cholly stood up andcould see only her grayish panties, so sad and limp aroundher ankles. Again the hatred mixed with tenderness. Thehatred would not let him pick her up, the tenderness forcedhim to cover her.
So when the child regained consciousness, she was lying
on the kitchen ﬂoor under a heavy quilt, trying to connectthe pain between her legs with the face of her mother loom-ing over her.163SEETHEDOGBOWWOWGOESTHEDOG
DOYOUWANTTOPLAYDOYOUWANTTOPLAYWITHJANESEETHEDOGRUNR
Once there was an old man who loved things, for the slight-
est contact with people produced in him a faint but persist-ent nausea. He could not remember when this distastebegan, nor could he remember ever being free of it. As ayoung boy he had been greatly disturbed by this revulsionwhich others did not seem to share, but having got a ﬁneeducation, he learned, among other things, the word “mis-anthrope.” Knowing his label provided him with both com-fort and courage, he believed that to name an evil was toneutralize if not annihilate it. Then, too, he had read severalbooks and made the acquaintance of several great misan-thropes of the ages, whose spiritual company soothed himand provided him with yardsticks for measuring his whims,his yearnings, and his antipathies. Moreover, he found mis-anthropy an excellent means of developing character: whenhe subdued his revulsion and occasionally touched, helped,counseled, or befriended somebody, he was able to think ofhis behavior as generous and his intentions as noble. Whenhe was enraged by some human effort or ﬂaw, he was able to
regard himself as discriminating, fastidious, and full of nicescruples.
As in the case of many misanthropes, his disdain for peo-
ple led him into a profession designed to serve them. He wasengaged in a line of work that was dependent solely on hisability to win the trust of others, and one in which the mostintimate relationships were necessary. Having dallied withthe priesthood in the Anglican Church, he abandoned it tobecome a caseworker. Time and misfortune, however, con-spired against him, and he settled ﬁnally on a profession thatbrought him both freedom and satisfaction. He became a“Reader, Adviser, and Interpreter of Dreams.” It was a pro-fession that suited him well. His hours were his own, thecompetition was slight, the clientele was already persuadedand therefore manageable, and he had numerous opportuni-ties to witness human stupidity without sharing it or beingcompromised by it, and to nurture his fastidiousness byviewing physical decay. Although his income was small, hehad no taste for luxury—his experience in the monasteryhad solidiﬁed his natural asceticism while it developed hispreference for solitude. Celibacy was a haven, silence ashield.
All his life he had a fondness for things—not the acquisi-
tion of wealth or beautiful objects, but a genuine love ofworn objects: a coffee pot that had been his mother’s, a wel-come mat from the door of a rooming house he once livedin, a quilt from a Salvation Army store counter. It was asthough his disdain of human contact had converted itselfinto a craving for things humans had touched. The residueof the human spirit smeared on inanimate objects was all hecould withstand of humanity. To contemplate, for example,165evidence of human footsteps on the mat—absorb the smell
of the quilt and wallow in the sweet certainty that manybodies had sweated, slept, dreamed, made love, been ill, andeven died under it. Wherever he went, he took along histhings, and was always searching for others. This thirst forworn things led to casual but habitual examinations of trashbarrels in alleys and wastebaskets in public place s....
All in all, his personality was an arabesque: intricate,
symmetrical, balanced, and tightly constructed—except forone ﬂaw. The careful design was marred occasionally byrare but keen sexual cravings.
He could have been an active homosexual but lacked the
courage. Bestiality did not occur to him, and sodomy wasquite out of the question, for he did not experience sustainederections and could not endure the thought of somebodyelse’s. And besides, the one thing that disgusted him morethan entering and caressing a woman was caressing andbeing caressed by a man. In any case, his cravings, althoughintense, never relished physical contact. He abhorred ﬂeshon ﬂesh. Body odor, breath odor, overwhelmed him. Thesight of dried matter in the corner of the eye, decayed ormissing teeth, ear wax, blackheads, moles, blisters, skincrusts—all the natural excretions and protections the bodywas capable of—disquieted him. His attentions thereforegradually settled on those humans whose bodies were leastoffensive—children. And since he was too difﬁdent to con-front homosexuality, and since little boys were insulting,scary, and stubborn, he further limited his interests to littlegirls. They were usually manageable and frequently seduc-tive. His sexuality was anything but lewd; his patronage oflittle girls smacked of innocence and was associated in hisThe Bluest Eyemind with cleanliness. He was what one might call a very
clean old man.
A cinnamon-eyed West Indian with lightly browned skin.Although his given name was printed on the sign in his
kitchen window, and on the business cards he circulated, hewas called by the townspeople Soaphead Church. No oneknew where the “Church” part came from—perhaps some-body’s recollection of his days as a guest preacher—thosereverends who had been called but who had no ﬂock orcoop, and were constantly visiting other churches, sitting onthe altar with the host preacher. But everybody knew what“Soaphead” meant—the tight, curly hair that took on andheld a sheen and wave when pomaded with soap lather. Asort of primitive process.
He had been reared in a family proud of its academic
accomplishments and its mixed blood—in fact, they be-lieved the former was based on the latter. A Sir Whitcomb,some decaying British nobleman, who chose to disinte-grate under a sun more easeful than England’s, had intro-
duced the white strain into the family in the early 1800 ’s.
Being a gentleman by order of the King, he had done thecivilized thing for his mulatto bastard—provided it withthree hundred pounds sterling, to the great satisfaction ofthe bastard’s mother, who felt that fortune had smiled onher. The bastard too was grateful, and regarded as his life’s goal the hoarding of this white strain. He bestowed his favors on a ﬁfteen-year-old girl of similar parentage.She, like a good Victorian parody, learned from her husband all that was worth learning—to separate her-self in body, mind, and spirit from all that suggested 
Africa; to cultivate the habits, tastes, preferences that her167absent father-in-law and foolish mother-in-law would have
approved.
They transferred this Anglophilia to their six children and
sixteen grandchildren. Except for an occasional and unac-countable insurgent who chose a restive black, they married“up,” lightening the family complexion and thinning out thefamily features.
With the conﬁdence born of a conviction of superiority,
they performed well at schools. They were industrious, or-derly, and energetic, hoping to prove beyond a doubt DeGobineau’s hypothesis that “all civilizations derive from thewhite race, that none can exist without its help, and that asociety is great and brilliant only so far as it preserves theblood of the noble group that created it.” Thus, they wereseldom overlooked by schoolmasters who recommendedpromising students for study abroad. The men studied med-icine, law, theology, and emerged repeatedly in the power-less government ofﬁces available to the native population.That they were corrupt in public and private practice, both lecherous and lascivious, was considered their nobleright, and thoroughly enjoyed by most of the less giftedpopulation.
As the years passed, due to the carelessness of some of the
Whitcomb brothers, it became difﬁcult to maintain theirwhiteness, and some distant and some not so distant rela-tives married each other. No obviously bad effects werenoticed from these ill-advised unions, but one or two oldmaids or gardener boys marked a weakening of facultiesand a disposition toward eccentricity in some of the chil-dren. Some ﬂaw outside the usual alcoholism and lechery.They blamed the ﬂaw on intermarriage with the family,however, not on the original genes of the decaying lord. InThe Bluest Eyeany case, there were ﬂukes. No more than in any other fam-
ily, to be sure, but more dangerous because more powerful.One of them was a religious fanatic who founded his ownsecret sect and fathered four sons, one of whom became aschoolmaster known for the precision of his justice and thecontrol in his violence. This schoolmaster married a sweet,indolent half-Chinese girl for whom the fatigue of bearing ason was too much. She died soon after childbirth. Her son,named Elihue Micah Whitcomb, provided the schoolmasterwith ample opportunity to work out his theories of educa-tion, discipline, and the good life. Little Elihue learned every-thing he needed to know well, particularly the ﬁne art ofself-deception. He read greedily but understood selectively,choosing the bits and pieces of other men’s ideas that sup-ported whatever predilection he had at the moment. Thus hechose to remember Hamlet’s abuse of Ophelia, but notChrist’s love of Mary Magdalene; Hamlet’s frivolous poli-tics, but not Christ’s serious anarchy. He noticed Gibbon’sacidity, but not his tolerance, Othello’s love for the fairDesdemona, but not Iago’s perverted love of Othello. Theworks he admired most were Dante’s; those he despisedmost were Dostoyevsky’s. For all his exposure to the bestminds of the Western world, he allowed only the narrowestinterpretation to touch him. He responded to his father’scontrolled violence by developing hard habits and a softimagination. A hatred of, and fascination with, any hint ofdisorder or decay.
At seventeen, however, he met his Beatrice, who was
three years his senior. A lovely, laughing big-legged girl whoworked as a clerk in a Chinese department store. Velma. Sostrong was her affection and zest for life, she did not elimi-nate the frail, sickly Elihue from it. She found his fastidious-169ness and complete lack of humor touching and longed to
introduce him to the idea of delight. He resisted the intro-duction, but she married him anyway, only to discover thathe was suffering from and enjoying an invincible melan-choly. When she learned two months into the marriage howimportant his melancholy was to him, that he was veryinterested in altering her joy to a more academic gloom, thathe equated lovemaking with communion and the HolyGrail, she simply left. She had not lived by the sea all thoseyears, listened to the wharfman’s songs all that time, tospend her life in the soundless cave of Elihue’s mind.
He never got over her desertion. She was to have been the
answer to his unstated, unacknowledged question—wherewas the life to counter the encroaching nonlife? Velma wasto rescue him from the nonlife he had learned on the ﬂat sideof his father’s belt. But he resisted her with such skill that shewas ﬁnally driven out to escape the inevitable boredom pro-duced by such a dainty life.
Young Elihue was saved from visible shattering by the
steady hand of his father, who reminded him of the family’sreputation and Velma’s questionable one. He then pursuedhis studies with more vigor than before and decided at lastto enter the ministry. When he was advised that he had noavocation, he left the island, came to America to study thethen budding ﬁeld of psychiatry. But the subject requiredtoo much truth, too many confrontations, and offered toolittle support to a failing ego. He drifted into sociology, thenphysical therapy. This diverse education continued for sixyears, when his father refused to support him any longer,until he “found” himself. Elihue, not knowing where tolook, was thrown back on his own devices, and “found”himself quite unable to earn money. He began to sink into The Bluest Eyea rapidly fraying gentility, punctuated with a few of the
white-collar occupations available to black people, regard-less of their noble bloodlines, in America: desk clerk at acolored hotel in Chicago, insurance agent, traveling sales-man for a cosmetics ﬁrm catering to blacks. He ﬁnally set-tled in Lorain, Ohio, in 1931 , palming himself off as a
minister, and inspiring awe with the way he spoke English.The women of the town early discovered his celibacy, andnot being able to comprehend his rejection of them, decidedthat he was supernatural rather than unnatural.
Once he understood their decision, he quickly followed
through, accepting the name (Soaphead Church) and therole they had given him. He rented a kind of back-roomapartment from a deeply religious old lady named BerthaReese. She was clean, quiet, and very close to total deafness.The lodgings were ideal in every way but one. Bertha Reesehad an old dog, Bob, who, although as deaf and quiet asshe, was not as clean. He slept most of his days away on theback porch, which was Elihue’s entrance. The dog was tooold to be of any use, and Bertha Reese had not the strengthor presence of mind to care for him properly. She fed him,and watered him, left him alone. The dog was mangy; hisexhausted eyes ran with a sea-green matter around whichgnats and ﬂies clustered. Soaphead was revolted by Bob andwished he would hurry up and die. He regarded this wishfor the dog’s death as humane, for he could not bear, he toldhimself, to see anything suffer. It did not occur to him thathe was really concerned about his own suffering, since thedog had adjusted himself to frailty and old age. Soapheadﬁnally determined to put an end to the animal’s misery, andbought some poison with which to do it. Only the horror ofhaving to go near him had prevented Soaphead from com-171pleting his mission. He waited for rage or blinding revulsion
to spur him.
Living there among his worn things, rising early every
morning from dreamless sleeps, he counseled those whosought his advice.
His business was dread. People came to him in dread,
whispered in dread, wept and pleaded in dread. And dreadwas what he counseled.
Singly they found their way to his door, wrapped each in
a shroud stitched with anger, yearning, pride, vengeance,loneliness, misery, defeat, and hunger. They asked for thesimplest of things: love, health, and money. Make him loveme. Tell me what this dream means. Help me get rid of thiswoman. Make my mother give me back my clothes. Stop myleft hand from shaking. Keep my baby’s ghost off the stove.Break so-and-so’s ﬁx. To all of these requests he addressedhimself. His practice was to do what he was bid—not to sug-gest to a party that perhaps the request was unfair, mean, orhopeless.
With only occasional, and increasingly rare, encounters
with the little girls he could persuade to be entertained byhim, he lived rather peaceably among his things, admittingto no regrets. He was aware, of course, that something wasawry in his life, and all lives, but put the problem where itbelonged, at the foot of the Originator of Life. He believedthat since decay, vice, ﬁlth, and disorder were pervasive, theymust be in the Nature of Things. Evil existed because Godhad created it. He, God, had made a sloven and unforgiv-able error in judgment: designing an imperfect universe.Theologians justiﬁed the presence of corruption as a meansby which men strove, were tested, and triumphed. A tri-umph of cosmic neatness. But this neatness, the neatness The Bluest Eyeof Dante, was in the orderly sectioning and segregating of all
levels of evil and decay. In the world it was not so. The mostexquisite-looking ladies sat on toilets, and the most dread-ful-looking had pure and holy yearnings. God had done apoor job, and Soaphead suspected that he himself couldhave done better. It was in fact a pity that the Maker had notsought his counsel.
Soaphead was reﬂecting once again on these thoughts
one late hot afternoon when he heard a tap on his door.Opening it, he saw a little girl, quite unknown to him. Shewas about twelve or so, he thought, and seemed to him piti-fully unattractive. When he asked her what she wanted, shedid not answer, but held out to him one of his cards advertis-ing his gifts and services: “If you are overcome with troubleand conditions that are not natural, I can remove them;Overcome Spells, Bad Luck, and Evil Inﬂuences. Remember,I am a true Spiritualist and Psychic Reader, born with power,and I will help you. Satisfaction in one visit. During manyyears of practice I have brought together many in marriageand reunited many who were separated. If you are unhappy,discouraged, or in distress, I can help you. Does bad luckseem to follow you? Has the one you love changed? I can tellyou why. I will tell you who your enemies and friends are,and if the one you love is true or false. If you are sick, I canshow you the way to health. I locate lost and stolen articles.Satisfaction guaranteed.”
Soaphead Church told her to come in.“What can I do for you, my child?”She stood there, her hands folded across her stomach, a
little protruding pot of tummy. “Maybe. Maybe you can doit for me.”
“Do what for you?”173“I can’t go to school no more. And I thought maybe you
could help me.”
“Help you how? Tell me. Don’t be frightened.”“My eyes.”“What about your eyes?”“I want them blue.”Soaphead pursed his lips, and let his tongue stroke a gold
inlay. He thought it was at once the most fantastic and themost logical petition he had ever received. Here was an uglylittle girl asking for beauty. A surge of love and understand-ing swept through him, but was quickly replaced by anger.Anger that he was powerless to help her. Of all the wishespeople had brought him—money, love, revenge—thisseemed to him the most poignant and the one most deserv-ing of fulﬁllment. A little black girl who wanted to rise upout of the pit of her blackness and see the world with blueeyes. His outrage grew and felt like power. For the ﬁrst timehe honestly wished he could work miracles. Never beforehad he really wanted the true and holy power—only thepower to make others believe he had it. It seemed so sad, sofrivolous, that mere mortality, not judgment, kept him fromit. Or did it?
With a trembling hand he made the sign of the cross over
her. His ﬂesh crawled; in that hot, dim little room of wornthings, he was chilled.
“I can do nothing for you, my child. I am not a magician.
I work only through the Lord. He sometimes uses me to helppeople. All I can do is offer myself to Him as the instrumentthrough which he works. If He wants your wish granted, Hewill do it.”
Soaphead walked to the window, his back to the girl. His
mind raced, stumbled, and raced again. How to frame theThe Bluest Eyenext sentence? How to hang on to the feeling of power. His
eye fell on old Bob sleeping on the porch.
“We must make, ah, some offering, that is, some contact
with nature. Perhaps some simple creature might be thevehicle through which He will speak. Let us see.”
He knelt down at the window, and moved his lips. After
what seemed a suitable length of time, he rose and went tothe icebox that stood near the other window. From it heremoved a small packet wrapped in pinkish butcher paper.From a shelf he took a small brown bottle and sprinkledsome of its contents on the substance inside the paper. Heput the packet, partly opened, on the table.
“Take this food and give it to the creature sleeping on the
porch. Make sure he eats it. And mark well how he behaves.If nothing happens, you will know that God has refusedyou. If the animal behaves strangely, your wish will begranted on the day following this one.”
The girl picked up the packet; the odor of the dark,
sticky meat made her want to vomit. She put a hand on her stomach.
“Courage. Courage, my child. These things are not
granted to faint hearts.”
She nodded and swallowed visibly, holding down the
vomit. Soaphead opened the door, and she stepped over thethreshold.
“Good-bye, God bless,” he said and quickly shut the
door. At the window he stood watching her, his eyebrowspulled together into waves of compassion, his tongue fon-dling the worn gold in his upper jaw. He saw the girl bend-ing down to the sleeping dog, who, at her touch, opened oneliquid eye, matted in the corners with what looked like greenglue. She reached out and touched the dog’s head, stroking175him gently. She placed the meat on the ﬂoor of the porch,
near his nose. The odor roused him; he lifted his head, andgot up to smell it better. He ate it in three or four gulps. Thegirl stroked his head again, and the dog looked up at herwith soft triangle eyes. Suddenly he coughed, the cough of aphlegmy old man—and got to his feet. The girl jumped. Thedog gagged, his mouth chomping the air, and promptly felldown. He tried to raise himself, could not, tried again andhalf-fell down the steps. Choking, stumbling, he moved likea broken toy around the yard. The girl’s mouth was open, alittle petal of tongue showing. She made a wild, pointlessgesture with one hand and then covered her mouth withboth hands. She was trying not to vomit. The dog fell again,a spasm jerking his body. Then he was quiet. The girl’s handscovering her mouth, she backed away a few feet, thenturned, ran out of the yard and down the walk.
Soaphead Church went to the table. He sat down, with
folded hands balancing his forehead on the balls of histhumbs. Then he rose and went to a tiny night table with adrawer, from which he took paper and a fountain pen. Abottle of ink was on the same shelf that held the poison.With these things he sat again at the table. Slowly, carefully,relishing his penmanship, he wrote the following letter:
Att: to he who greatly ennobled human nature
by creating itDear God:
The Purpose of this letter is to familiarize you with
facts which either have escaped your notice, or whichyou have chosen to ignore.
Once upon a time I lived greenly and youngish on
one of your islands. An island of the archipelago in theThe Bluest EyeSouth Atlantic between North and South America, en-
closing the Caribbean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico:divided into the Greater Antilles, the Lesser Antilles,and the Bahama Islands. Not the Windward or Lee-ward Island colonies, mark you, but within, of course,the Greater of the two Antilles (while the precision ofmy prose may be, at times, laborious, it is necessarythat I identify myself to you clearly).
Now.We in this colony took as our own the most dra-
matic, and the most obvious, of our white masters’characteristics, which were, of course, their worst. Inretaining the identity of our race, we held fast to thosecharacteristics most gratifying to sustain and least trou-blesome to maintain. Consequently we were not royalbut snobbish, not aristocratic but class-conscious; webelieved authority was cruelty to our inferiors, andeducation was being at school. We mistook violencefor passion, indolence for leisur e, and thought reckless-
ness was freedom. We raised our children and rearedour crops; we let infants grow, and property develop.Our manhood was deﬁned by acquisitions. Our wom-anhood by acquiescence. And the smell of your fruitand the labor of your days we abhorred.
This morning, before the little black girl came, I
cried—for Velma. Oh, not aloud. There is no wind tocarry, bear, or even refuse to bear, a sound so heavywith regret. But in my silent own lone way, I cried—forVelma. You need to know about Velma to understandwhat I did today.
She (Velma) left me the way people leave a hotel
room. A hotel room is a place to be when you are doing177something else. Of itself it is of no consequence to one’s
major scheme. A hotel room is convenient. But its con-venience is limited to the time you need it while you arein that particular town on that particular business; youhope it is comfortable, but prefer, rather, that it beanonymous. It is not, after all, where you live.
When you no longer need it, you pay a little some-
thing for its use; say, “Thank you, sir,” and when yourbusiness in that town is over, you go away from thatroom. Does anybody regret leaving a hotel room? Doesanybody, who has a home, a real home somewhere,want to stay there? Does anybody look back with af
-
fection, or even disgust, at a hotel room when theyleave it? You can only love or despise whatever living
was done in that room. But the room itself? But youtake a souvenir. Not, oh, not, to remember the room.To remember, rather, the time and the place of yourbusiness, your adventure. What can anyone feel for ahotel room? One doesn’t any more feel for a hotel roomthan one expects a hotel room to feel for its occupant.
That, heavenly, heavenly Father, was how she left
me; or rather, she never left me, because she was neverever there.
You remember, do you, how and of what we are
made? Let me tell you now about the breasts of littlegirls. I apologize for the inappropriateness (is that it?),the imbalance of loving them at awkward times of day,and in awkward places, and the tastelessness of lovingthose which belonged to members of my family. Do Ihave to apologize for loving strangers?
But you too are amiss here, Lord. How, why, did you
allow it to happen? How is it I could lift my eyes fromThe Bluest Eyethe contemplation of Your Body and fall deeply into
the contemplation of theirs? The buds. The buds onsome of these saplings. They were mean, you know,mean and tender. Mean little buds resisting the touch,springing like rubber. But aggressive. Daring me totouch. Commanding me to touch. Not a bit shy, asyou’d suppose. They stuck out at me, oh yes, at me.Slender-chested, ﬁnger-chested lassies. Have you everseen them, Lord? I mean, really seen them? One couldnot see them and not love them. You who made themmust have considered them lovely even as an idea—how much more lovely is the manifestation of thatidea. I couldn’t, as you must recall, keep my hands, mymouth, off them. Salt-sweet. Like not quite ripe straw-berries covered with the light salt sweat of runningdays and hopping, skipping, jumping hours.
The love of them—the touch, taste, and feel of
them—was not just an easy luxurious human vice;they were, for me, A Thing To Do Instead. Instead ofPapa, instead of the Cloth, instead of Velma, and Ichose not to do without them. But I didn’t go into the
church. At least I didn’t do that. As to what I did do? I told people I knew all about You. That I had re-ceived Y our Powers. It was not a complete lie;but it
was a complete lie. I should never have, I admit, I
should never have taken their money in exchange forwell-phrased, well-placed, well-faced lies. But, markyou, I hated it. Not for a moment did I love the lies or the money.
But consider: The woman who left the hotel room.Consider: The greentime, the noontime of the 
archipelago.179Consider: Their hopeful eyes that were outdone only
by their hoping breasts.
Consider: How I needed a comfortable evil to pre-
vent my knowing what I could not bear to know.
Consider: How I hated and despised the money.And now, consider: Not according to my just de-
serts, but according to mymercy, the little black girl
that came a-looning at me today. Tell me, Lord, howcould you leave a lass so long so lone that she could ﬁndher way to me? How could you? I weep for you, Lord.And it is because I weep for You that I had to do yourwork for You.
Do you know what she came for? Blue eyes. New,
blue eyes, she said. Like she was buying shoes. “I’d likea pair of new blue eyes.” She must have asked you forthem for a very long time, and you hadn’t replied. (Ahabit, I could have told her, a long-ago habit brokenfor Job—but no more.) She came to mefor them. She
had one of my cards. (Card enclosed.) By the way, Iadded the Micah—Elihue Micah Whitcomb. But I amcalled Soaphead Church. I cannot remember how orwhy I got the name. What makes one name more aperson than another? Is the name the real thing, then?And the person only what his name says? Is that whyto the simplest and friendliest of questions: “What isyour name?” put to you by Moses, You would not say,and said instead “I am who I am.” Like Popeye? I YamWhat I Yam? Afraid you were, weren’t you, to give outyour name? Afraid they would know the name andthen know you? Then they wouldn’t fear you? It’s quiteall right. Don’t be vexed. I mean no offense. I under-stand. I have been a bad man too, and an unhappy manThe Bluest Eyetoo. But someday Iwill die. I was always so kind. Why
do I have to die? The little girls. The little girls are theonly things I’ll miss. Do you know that when I touchedtheir sturdy little tits and bit them—just a little—I felt I was being friendly? I didn’t want to kiss their mouthsor sleep in the bed with them or take a child bride formy own. Playful, I felt, and friendly. Not like the news-papers said. Not like the people whispered. And theydidn’t mind at all. Not at all. Remember how so manyof them came back? No one would even try to under-stand that. If I’d been hurting them, would they havecome back? Two of them, Doreen and Sugar Babe,they’d come together. I gave them mints, money, andthey’d eat ice cream with their legs open while I playedwith them. It was like a party. And there wasn’t nasti-ness, and there wasn’t any ﬁlth, and there wasn’t anyodor, and there wasn’t any groaning—just the lightwhite laughter of little girls and me. And there wasn’tany look—any long funny look—any long funnyVelma look afterward. No look that makes you feeldirty afterward. That makes you want to die. With little girls it is all clean and good and friendly.
You have to understand that, Lord. You said, “Suf-
fer little children to come unto me, and harm themnot.” Did you forget? Did you forget about the chil-dren? Yes. You forgot. You let them go wanting, sit onroad shoulders, crying next to their dead mothers. I’veseen them charred, lame, halt. You forgot, Lord. Youforgot how and when to be God.
That’s why I changed the little black girl’s eyes for
her, and I didn’t touch her; not a ﬁnger did I lay on her.But I gave her those blue eyes she wanted. Not for181pleasure, and not for money. I did what You did not,
could not, would not do: I looked at that ugly littleblack girl, and I loved her. I played You. And it was avery good show!
I, I have caused a miracle. I gave her the eyes. I gave
her the blue, blue, two blue eyes. Cobalt blue. A streakof it right out of your own blue heaven. No one elsewill see her blue eyes. But shewill. And she will live
happily ever after. I, I have found it meet and right soto do.
Now you are jealous. You are jealous of me.You see? I, too, have created. Not aboriginally, like
you, but creation is a heady wine, more for the tasterthan the brewer.
Having therefore imbibed, as it were, of the nectar, 
I am not afraid of You, of Death, not even of Life, andit’s all right about Velma; and it’s all right about Papa;and it’s all right about the Greater and the Lesser An-tilles. Quite all right. Quite.
With kindest regards, I remain,
Your,
Elihue Micah Whitcomb
Soaphead Church folded the sheets of paper into three
equal parts and slipped them into an envelope. Although hehad no seal, he longed for sealing wax. He removed a cigarbox from under the bed and rummaged about in it. Therewere some of his most precious things: a sliver of jade thathad dislodged from a cuff link at the Chicago hotel; a goldpendant shaped like a Y with a piece of coral attached to itthat had belonged to the mother he never knew; four largehairpins that Velma had left on the rim of the bathroomThe Bluest Eyesink; a powder blue grosgrain ribbon from the head of a 
little girl named Precious Jewel; a blackened faucet headfrom the sink in a jail cell in Cincinnati; two marbles he hadfound under a bench in Morningside Park on a very ﬁnespring day; an old Lucky Hart catalog that smelled still ofnut-brown and mocha face powder, and lemon vanishingcream. Distracted by his things, he forgot what he had beenlooking for. The effort to recall was too great; there was abuzzing in his head, and a wash of fatigue overcame him. Heclosed his box, eased himself out on the bed, and slippedinto an ivory sleep from which he could not hear the tinyyelps of an old lady who had come out of her candy storeand found the still carcass of an old dog named Bob.183Summer
LI have only to break into the tightness of a strawberry,
and I see summer—its dust and lowering skies. It remainsfor me a season of storms. The parched days and stickynights are undistinguished in my mind, but the storms,the violent sudden storms, both frightened and quenchedme. But my memory is uncertain; I recall a summer stormin the town where we lived and imagine a summer mymother knew in 1929 . There was a tornado that year, she
said, that blew away half of south Lorain. I mix up hersummer with my own. Biting the strawberry, thinking ofstorms, I see her. A slim young girl in a pink crepe dress.One hand is on her hip; the other lolls about her thigh—waiting. The wind swoops her up, high above the houses,but she is still standing, hand on hip. Smiling. Theanticipation and promise in her lolling hand are notaltered by the holocaust. In the summer tornado of 1929 ,
my mother’s hand is unextinguished. She is strong,smiling, and relaxed while the world falls down abouther. So much for memory. Public fact becomes private
reality, and the seasons of a Midwestern town become the Moirai of our small lives.
The summer was already thick when Frieda and I
received our seeds. We had waited since April for themagic package containing the packets and packets ofseeds we were to sell for ﬁve cents each, which wouldentitle us to a new bicycle. We believed it, and spent amajor part of every day trooping about the town sellingthem. Although Mama had restricted us to the homes ofpeople she knew or the neighborhoods familiar to us, weknocked on all doors, and ﬂoated in and out of everyhouse that opened to us: twelve-room houses thatsheltered half as many families, smelling of grease andurine; tiny wooden four-room houses tucked into bushesnear the railroad tracks; the up-over places—apartmentsup over ﬁsh markets, butcher shops, furniture stores,saloons, restaurants; tidy brick houses with ﬂoweredcarpets and glass bowls with ﬂuted edges.
During that summer of the seed selling we  thought about
the money, thought about the seeds, and listened with onlyhalf an ear to what people were saying. In the houses ofpeople who knew us we were asked to come in and sit,given cold water or lemonade; and while we sat there beingrefreshed, the people continued their conversations or wentabout their chores. Little by little we began to piece a storytogether, a secret, terrible, awful story. And it was only after two or three such vaguely overheard conversationsthat we realized that the story was about Pecola. Properlyplaced, the fragments of talk ran like this:
“Did you hear about that girl?”“What? Pregnant?”The Bluest Eye“Yas. But guess who?”
“Who? I don’t know all these little old boys.”“That’s just it. Ain’t no little old boy. They say it’s
Cholly.”
“Cholly? Her daddy?”“Uh-huh.”“Lord. Have mercy. That dirty nigger.”“’Member that time he tried to burn them up? I knew
he was crazy for sure then.”
“What’s she gone do? The mama?”“Keep on like she been, I reckon. He taken off.”“County ain’t gone let her keep that baby, is they?”“Don’t know.”“None of them Breedloves seem right anyhow. That
boy is off somewhere every minute, and the girl wasalways foolish.”
“Don’t nobody know nothing about them anyway.
Where they come from or nothing. Don’t seem to haveno people.”
“What you reckon make him do a thing like that?”“Beats me. Just nasty.”“Well, they ought to take her out of school.”“Ought to. She carry some of the blame.”“Oh, come on. She ain’t but twelve or so.”“Yeah. But you never know. How come she didn’t
ﬁght him?”
“Maybe she did.”“Yeah? You never know.”“Well, it probably won’t live. They say the way her
mama beat her she lucky to be alive herself.”
“She be lucky if it don’t live. Bound to be the ugliest
thing walking.”189“Can’t help but be. Ought to be a law: two ugly
people doubling up like that to make more ugly. Be betteroff in the ground.”
“Well, I wouldn’t worry none. It be a miracle if it
live.”
Our astonishment was short-lived, for it gave way to a
curious kind of defensive shame; we were embarrassedfor Pecola, hurt for her, and ﬁnally we just felt sorry forher. Our sorrow drove out all thoughts of the newbicycle. And I believe our sorrow was the more intensebecause nobody else seemed to share it. They weredisgusted, amused, shocked, outraged, or even excited bythe story. But we listened for the one who would say,“Poor little girl,” or, “Poor baby,” but there was onlyhead-wagging where those words should have been. Welooked for eyes creased with concern, but saw only veils.
I thought about the baby that everybody wanted dead,
and saw it very clearly. It was in a dark, wet place, itshead covered with great O’s of wool, the black faceholding, like nickels, two clean black eyes, the ﬂarednose, kissing-thick lips, and the living, breathing silk ofblack skin. No synthetic yellow bangs suspended overmarble-blue eyes, no pinched nose and bowline mouth.More strongly than my fondness for Pecola, I felt a needfor someone to want the black baby to live—just tocounteract the universal love of white baby dolls, ShirleyTemples, and Maureen Peals. And Frieda must have feltthe same thing. We did not think of the fact that Pecolawas not married; lots of girls had babies who were notmarried. And we did not dwell on the fact that the baby’s father was Pecola’s father too; the process ofhaving a baby by any male was incomprehensible to The Bluest Eyeus—at least she knew her father. We thought only of this
overwhelming hatred for the unborn baby. Weremembered Mrs. Breedlove knocking Pecola down andsoothing the pink tears of the frozen doll baby thatsounded like the door of our icebox. We remembered theknuckled eyes of schoolchildren under the gaze ofMeringue Pie and the eyes of these same children whenthey looked at Pecola. Or maybe we didn’t remember; wejust knew. We had defended ourselves since memoryagainst everything and everybody, considered all speech acode to be broken by us, and all gestures subject tocareful analysis; we had become headstrong, devious andarrogant. Nobody paid us any attention, so we paid verygood attention to ourselves. Our limitations were notknown to us—not then. Our only handicap was our size;people gave us orders because they were bigger andstronger. So it was with conﬁdence, strengthened by pityand pride, that we decided to change the course of eventsand alter a human life.
“What we gone do, Frieda?”“What can we do? Miss Johnson said it would be a
miracle if it lived.”
“So let’s make it a miracle.”“Yeah, but how?”“We could pray.”“That’s not enough. Remember last time with the
bird?”
“That was different; it was half-dead when we found it.”“I don’t care, I still think we have to do something
really strong this time.”
“Let’s ask Him to let Pecola’s baby live and promise to
be good for a whole month.”191“O.K. But we better give up something so He’ll know
we really mean it this time.”
“Give up what? We ain’t got nothing. Nothing but the
seed money, two dollars.”
“We could give that. Or, you know what? We could
give up the bicycle. Bury the money an d...p l a n t  t h e
seeds.”
“All of the money?”“Claudia, do you want to do it or not?”“O.K. I just though t...O . K . ”
“We have to do it right, now. We’ll bury the money
over by her house so we can’t go back and dig it up, andwe’ll plant the seeds out back of our house so we canwatch over them. And when they come up, we’ll knoweverything is all right. All right?”
“All right. Only let me sing this time. You say the
magic words.”The Bluest EyeLOOKLOOKHERECOMESAFRIENDTHE
FRIENDWILLPLAYWITHJANETHEYWILLPLAYAGOODGAMEPLAYJANEPLAY
How many times a minute are you going to look inside that
old thing?
I didn’t look in a long time.You did too —
So what? I can look if I want to.I didn’t say you couldn’t. I just don’t know why you have
to look every minute. They aren’t going anywhere.
I know it. I just like to look.You scared they might go away?Of course not. How can they go away?The others went away.They didn’t go away. They changed.Go away. Change. What’s the difference?A lot. Mr. Soaphead said they would last forever.Forever and ever Amen?Yes, if you want to know.You don’t have to be so smarty when you talk to me.I’m not being smarty. You started it.I’d just like to do something else besides watch you stare
in that mirror.
You’re just jealous.I am not.You are. You wish you had them.Ha. What would I look like with blue eyes?Nothing much.If you’re going to keep this up, I may as well go on off by
myself.
No. Don’t go. What you want to do?We could go outside and play, I guess.But it’s too hot.You can take your old mirror. Put it in your coat pocket,
and you can look at yourself up and down the street.
Boy! I never would have thought you’d be so jealous.Oh, come on!You are.Are what?Jealous.O.K. So I’m jealous.See. I told you.No. I told you.Are they really nice?Yes. Very nice.Just “very nice”?Really, truly, very nice.Really, truly, bluely nice?Oh, God. You are crazy.I am not!I didn’t mean it that way.Well, what did you mean?Come on. It’s too hot in here.The Bluest EyeWait a minute. I can’t ﬁnd my shoes.
Here they are.Oh. Thank you.Got your mirror?Yes dearie ....
Well, let’s go then ....  O w !
What’s the matter?The sun is too bright. It hurts my eyes.Not mine. I don’t even blink. Look. I can look right at the
sun.
Don’t do that.Why not? It doesn’t hurt. I don’t even have to blink.Well, blink anyway. You make me feel funny, staring at
the sun like that.
Feel funny how?I don’t know.Yes, you do. Feel funny how?I told you, I don’t know.Why don’t you look at me when you say that? You’re
looking drop-eyed like Mrs. Breedlove.
Mrs. Breedlove look drop-eyed at you?Yes. Now she does. Ever since I got my blue eyes, she look
away from me all of the time. Do you suppose she’s jealoustoo?
Could be. They are pretty, you know.I know. He really did a good job. Everybody’s jealous.
Every time I look at somebody, they look off.
Is that why nobody has told you how pretty they are?Sure it is. Can you imagine? Something like that happen-
ing to a person, and nobody but nobody saying anythingabout it? They all try to pretend they don’t see them. Isn’tthat funny? ...I  said, isn’t that funny?195Yes.
You are the only one who tells me how pretty they are.Yes.You are a real friend. I’m sorry about picking on you
before. I mean, saying you were jealous and all.
That’s all right.No. Really. You are my very best friend. Why didn’t I
know you before?
You didn’t need me before.Didn’t need you?I mean . . . you were so unhappy before. I guess you
didn’t notice me before.
I guess you’re right. And I was so lonely for friends. And
you were right here. Right before my eyes.
No, honey. Right after your eyes.What?What does Maureen think about your eyes?She doesn’t say anything about them. Has she said any-
thing to you about them?
No. Nothing.Do you like Maureen?Oh. She’s all right. For a half-white girl, that is.I know what you mean. But would you like to be her
friend? I mean, would you like to go around with her or any-thing?
No.Me neither. But she sure is popular.Who wants to be popular?Not me.Me neither.But you couldn’t be popular anyway. You don’t even go
to school.The Bluest EyeYou don’t either.
I know. But I used to.What did you stop for?They made me.Who made you?I don’t know. After that ﬁrst day at school when I had my
blue eyes. Well, the next day they had Mrs. Breedlove comeout. Now I don’t go anymore. But I don’t care.
You don’t?No, I don’t. They’re just prejudiced, that’s all.Yes, they sure are prejudiced.Just because I got blue eyes, bluer than theirs, they’re prej-
udiced.
That’s right.They are bluer, aren’t they?Oh, yes. Much bluer.Bluer than Joanna’s?Much bluer than Joanna’s.And bluer than Michelena’s?Much bluer than Michelena’s.I thought so. Did Michelena say anything to you about
my eyes?
No. Nothing.Did you say anything to her?No.How come?How come what?How come you don’t talk to anybody?I talk to you.Besides me.I don’t like anybody besides you.Where do you live?197I told you once.
What is your mother’s name?Why are you so busy meddling me?I just wondered. You don’t talk to anybody. You don’t go
to school. And nobody talks to you.
How do you know nobody talks to me?They don’t. When you’re in the house with me, even Mrs.
Breedlove doesn’t say anything to you. Ever. Sometimes Iwonder if she even sees you.
Why wouldn’t she see me?I don’t know. She almost walks right over you.Maybe she doesn’t feel too good since Cholly’s gone.Oh, yes. You must be right.She probably misses him.I don’t know why she would. All he did was get drunk
and beat her up.
Well, you know how grown-ups are.Yes. No. How are they?Well, she probably loved him anyway.HIM?Sure. Why not? Anyway, if she didn’t love him, she sure
let him do it to her a lot.
That’s nothing.How do you know?I saw them all the time. She didn’t like it.Then why’d she let him do it to her?Because he made her.How could somebody make you do something like
that?
Easy.Oh, yeah? How easy?They just make you, that’s all.The Bluest EyeI guess you’re right. And Cholly could make anybody do
anything.
He could not.He made you, didn’t he?Shut up!I was only teasing.Shut up!O.K. O.K.He just tried, see? He didn’t do anything. You hear me?I’m shutting up.You’d better. I don’t like that kind of talk.I said I’m shutting up.You always talk so dirty. Who told you about that, 
anyway?
I forget.Sammy?No. You did.I did not.You did. You said he tried to do it to you when you were
sleeping on the couch.
See there! You don’t even know what you’re talking
about. It was when I was washing dishes.
Oh, yes. Dishes.By myself. In the kitchen.Well, I’m glad you didn’t let him.Yes.Did you?Did I what?Let him.Now who’s crazy?I am, I guess.You sure are.199Still . . .
Well. Go ahead. Still what?I wonder what it would be like.Horrible.Really?Yes. Horrible.Then why didn’t you tell Mrs. Breedlove?I did tell her!I don’t mean about the ﬁrst time. I mean about the sec-
ond time, when you were sleeping on the couch.
I wasn’t sleeping! I was reading!You don’t have to shout.You don’t understand anything, do you? She didn’t even
believe me when I told her.
So that’s why you didn’t tell her about the second time?She wouldn’t have believed me then either.You’re right. No use telling her when she wouldn’t believe
you.
That’s what I’m trying to get through your thick head.O.K. I understand now. Just about.What do you mean, just about?You sure are mean today.You keep on saying mean and sneaky things. I thought
you were my friend.
I am. I am.Then leave me alone about Cholly.O.K.There’s nothing more to say about him, anyway. He’s
gone, anyway.
Yes. Good riddance.Yes. Good riddance.And Sammy’s gone too.The Bluest EyeAnd Sammy’s gone too.
So there’s no use talking about it. I mean them.No. No use at all.It’s all over now.Yes.And you don’t have to be afraid of Cholly coming at you
anymore.
No.That was horrible, wasn’t it?Yes.The second time too?Yes.Really? The second time too?Leave me alone! You better leave me alone.Can’t you take a joke? I was only funning.I don’t like to talk about dirty things.Me neither. Let’s talk about something else.What? What will we talk about?Why, your eyes.Oh, yes. My eyes. My blue eyes. Let me look again.See how pretty they are.Yes. They get prettier each time I look at them.They are the prettiest I’ve ever seen.Really?Oh, yes.Prettier than the sky?Oh, yes. Much prettier than the sky.Prettier than Alice-and-Jerry Storybook eyes?Oh, yes. Much prettier than Alice-and-Jerry Storybook
eyes.
And prettier than Joanna’s?Oh, yes. And bluer too.201Bluer than Michelena’s?
Yes.Are you sure?Of course I’m sure.You don’t sound sur e....
Well, I am sure. Unless ....
Unless what?Oh, nothing. I was just thinking about a lady I saw yester-
day. Her eyes sure were blue. But no. Not bluer than yours.
Are you sure?Yes. I remember them now. Yours are bluer.I’m glad.Me too. I’d hate to think there was anybody around with
bluer eyes than yours. I’m sure there isn’t. Not around here,anyway.
But you don’t know, do you? You haven’t seen everybody,
have you?
No. I haven’t.So there could be, couldn’t there?Not hardly.But maybe. Maybe. You said “around here.” Nobody
“around here” probably has bluer eyes. What about some-place else? Even if my eyes are bluer than Joanna’s and bluerthan Michelena’s and bluer than that lady’s you saw, sup-pose there is somebody way off somewhere with bluer eyesthan mine?
Don’t be silly.There could be. Couldn’t there?Not hardly.But suppose. Suppose a long way off. In Cincinnati, say,
there is somebody whose eyes are bluer than mine? Supposethere are twopeople with bluer eyes?The Bluest EyeSo what? You asked for blue eyes. You got blue eyes.
He should have made them bluer.Who?Mr. Soaphead.Did you say what color blue you wanted them?No. I forgot.Oh. Well.Look. Look over there. At that girl. Look at her eyes. Are
they bluer than mine?
No, I don’t think so.Did you look real good?Yes.Here comes someone. Look at his. See if they’re bluer.You’re being silly. I’m not going to look at everybody’s
eyes.
You have to.No I don’t.Please. If there is somebody with bluer eyes than mine,
then maybe there is somebody with the bluest eyes. Thebluest eyes in the whole world.
That’s just too bad, isn’t it?Please help me look.No.But suppose my eyes aren’t blue enough?Blue enough for what?Blue enough for ...I  don’t know. Blue enough for some-
thing. Blue enoug h... for you!
I’m not going to play with you anymore.Oh. Don’t leave me.Yes. I am.Why? Are you mad at me?Yes.203Because my eyes aren’t blue enough? Because I don’t have
the bluest eyes?
No. Because you’re acting silly.Don’t go. Don’t leave me. Will you come back if I get
them?
Get what?The bluest eyes. Will you come back then?Of course I will. I’m just going away for a little while.You promise?Sure. I’ll be back. Right before your very eyes.
So it was.
A little black girl yearns for the blue eyes of a little white
girl, and the horror at the heart of her yearning is exceededonly by the evil of fulﬁllment.
We saw her sometimes. Frieda and I—after the baby
came too soon and died. After the gossip and the slow wag-ging of heads. She was so sad to see. Grown people lookedaway; children, those who were not frightened by her,laughed outright.
The damage done was total. She spent her days, her ten-
dril, sap-green days, walking up and down, up and down,her head jerking to the beat of a drummer so distant only shecould hear. Elbows bent, hands on shoulders, she ﬂailed herarms like a bird in an eternal, grotesquely futile effort to ﬂy.Beating the air, a winged but grounded bird, intent on theblue void it could not reach—could not even see—but whichﬁlled the valleys of the mind.
We tried to see her without looking at her, and never,
never went near. Not because she was absurd, or repulsive,or because we were frightened, but because we had failedThe Bluest Eyeher. Our ﬂowers never grew. I was convinced that Frieda
was right, that I had planted them too deeply. How could Ihave been so sloven? So we avoided Pecola Breedlove—for-ever.
And the years folded up like pocket handkerchiefs.
Sammy left town long ago; Cholly died in the workhouse;Mrs. Breedlove still does housework. And Pecola is some-where in that little brown house she and her mother movedto on the edge of town, where you can see her even now,once in a while. The birdlike gestures are worn away to amere picking and plucking her way between the tire rimsand the sunﬂowers, between Coke bottles and milkweed,among all the waste and beauty of the world—which iswhat she herself was. All of our waste which we dumped onher and which she absorbed. And all of our beauty, whichwas hers ﬁrst and which she gave to us. All of us—all whoknew her—felt so wholesome after we cleaned ourselves onher. We were so beautiful when we stood astride her ugli-ness. Her simplicity decorated us, her guilt sanctiﬁed us, herpain made us glow with health, her awkwardness made usthink we had a sense of humor. Her inarticulateness made usbelieve we were eloquent. Her poverty kept us generous.Even her waking dreams we used—to silence our own night-mares. And she let us, and thereby deserved our contempt.We honed our egos on her, padded our characters with herfrailty, and yawned in the fantasy of our strength.
And fantasy it was, for we were not strong, only aggres-
sive; we were not free, merely licensed; we were not compas-sionate, we were polite; not good, but well behaved. Wecourted death in order to call ourselves brave, and hid likethieves from life. We substituted good grammar for intel-lect; we sw itched habits to simulate maturity; we rearranged205lies and called it truth, seeing in the new pattern of an old
idea the Revelation and the Word.
She, however, stepped over into madness, a madness
which protected her from us simply because it bored us inthe end.
Oh, some of us “loved” her. The Maginot Line. And
Cholly loved her. I’m sure he did. He, at any rate, was theone who loved her enough to touch her, envelop her, givesomething of himself to her. But his touch was fatal, and thesomething he gave her ﬁlled the matrix of her agony withdeath. Love is never any better than the lover. Wicked peo-ple love wickedly, violent people love violently, weak peoplelove weakly, stupid people love stupidly, but the love of afree man is never safe. There is no gift for the beloved. Thelover alone possesses his gift of love. The loved one is shorn,neutralized, frozen in the glare of the lover’s inward eye.
And now when I see her searching the garbage—for what?
The thing we assassinated? I talk about how I did notplant
the seeds too deeply, how it was the fault of the earth, theland, of our town. I even think now that the land of the entirecountry was hostile to marigolds that year. This soil is bad forcertain kinds of ﬂowers. Certain seeds it will not nurture, cer-tain fruit it will not bear, and when the land kills of its ownvolition, we acquiesce and say the victim had no right to live.We are wrong, of course, but it doesn’t matter. It’s too late. Atleast on the edge of my town, among the garbage and thesunﬂowers of my town, it’s much, much, much too late.The Bluest EyeContents
ITLE P AGE
DEDICA TION
PIGRAPH
FOREWORD
PART ONE
919
920
921
922
923
927
PART TWO
937
939
940
941
965BOUT THE AUTHOR
LSO BY T ONI MORRISON
CCLAIM FOR T ONI MORRISON’S SULA
COPYRIGHTIt is sheer good fortune to miss
somebody long befor e they leave you.
This book is for For d and Slade, whom
I miss although they have not left me.“Nobody knew my r ose of the world
but me…. I had too much glory . 
They don’ t want glory like that
in nobody’ s heart.”
—The Rose T attooFOREWORD
In the fifties, when I was a student, the embarrassment of being called a
politically minded writer was so acute, the fear of critical derision for
channeling one’s creativity toward the state of social affairs so profound, it
made me wonder: Why the panic? The flight from any accusation of
revealing an awareness of the political world in one’s fiction turned my
attention to the source of the panic and the means by which writers sought
to ease it. What could be so bad about being socially astute, politically
aware in literature? Conventiona l wisdom agrees that political fiction is not
art; that such work is less likely to have aesthetic value because politics—
all politics—is agenda and therefore its presence taints aesthetic production.
That wisdom, which seems to have been unavailable to Chaucer , or
Dante, or Catullus, or Sophocles, or Shakespeare, or Dickens, is still with
us, and, in 1969 it placed an inordinate burden on African  American
writers. Whether they were wholly uninterested in politics of any sort, or
whether they were politically inclined, aware, or aggressive, the fact of their
race or the race of their characters doomed them to a “political-only”
analysis of their worth. If Phillis Wheatley wrote “The sky is blue,” the
critical question was what could blue sky mean to a black slave  woman? If
Jean Toomer wrote “The iron is hot,” the question was how accurately or
poorly he expres sed chains of servitude. This burden rested not only on the
critics, but also on the reader . How does a reader of any race situate herself
or himse lf in order to approach  the world of a black writer? Won’t there
always be apprehension about what may be revealed, exposed about the
reader?
In 1970 , when I began writing Sula,  I had already had the depressing
experience of reading commentary on my first novel, The Bluest Eye, by
both black and white reviewers that—with two exceptions—had  little merit
since the evaluation ignored precisely the “aesthetics only” criteria itchampioned. If the novel was good, it was because it was faithful to a
certain kind of politics; if it was bad, it was because it was faithless to them.
The judgment was based on whether “Black people are—or are not—like
this.” This time out, I returned the compliment and ignored the shallowness
of such views and, again, rooted the narrative in a landscape already tainted
by the fact that it existed. Only a few people would be interested , I thought,
in any wider approach—fewer than the tiny percentage of the fifteen
hundred who had bought the first book. But the act of writing was too
personally impo rtant for me to abandon it just because the prospects of my
being taken seriously were bleak. It may be difficult now to imagine how it
felt to be seen as a problem to be solved rather than a writer to be read.
James Baldwin, Ralph Ellison, Richard Wright, Zora Neale Hurston—all
had been  called upon to write an essay addressing the “problem” of being a
“Negro” writer . In that no-win situation—inauthentic, even irresponsible, to
those looking for a politically representative canvas; marginaliz ed by those
assessing value by how “moral”  the characters were—my only option was
fidelity to my own sensibility . Further exploration of my own interests,
questions, chall enges. And since my sensibility was highly political and
passionately aesthetic, it would  unapologetically inform the work I did. I
refused to explain, or even acknowledge, the “problem” as anything other
than an artistic one. Other questions mattered more. What is friendship
between women  when unmediated by men? What choices are available to
black women outside their own society’ s approval? What are the risks of
individualism in a determinedly individualistic, yet racially uniform and
socially static, community?
Female freedom  always means sexual freedom, even when—e specially
when—it is seen through the prism of economic freedom. The sexual
freedom of Hannah Peach was my entrance into the story , constructed from
shreds of memory about the way local women regarded a certain kind of
female—envy coupled with amused approbation. Against her fairly modest
claims to personal liberty are placed conventional and anarchic ones: Eva’s
physical sacrifice for economic freedom; Nel’s accommodation to the
protection marriage promises; Sula’ s resistance to either sacrifice or
accommodation. Hannah’ s claims are acceptable in her neighborhood
because they are nonfinancial and nonthreatening; she does not disturb ordeplete family resources. Becau se her dependence is on another woman,
Eva, who has both money and authority , she is not competitive. But Sula,
although she does nothing so horrendous as what Eva does, is seen by the
townspeople as not just competi tive, but devouring, evil. Nel, with the most
minimal demands, is seen as the muted standard.
Hannah, Nel, Eva, Sula were points of a cross—each one a choice for
characters boun d by gender and race. The nexus of that cross would be a
merging of responsibility and liberty difficult to reach, a battle among
women who are understood to be least able to win it. Wrapped around the
arms of that cross were wires of other kinds of battles—the veteran, the
orphans, the husband, the laborers, confined to a village by the same forces
that mandated the struggle. And the only possible triumph was that of the
imagination.
The job, of course, was summo ning those perceptions in language that
could express them. Sula stretched my attempts to manip ulate language, to
work credibly and, perhaps, elegantly with a discredited vocabulary . To use
folk language, vernacular in a manner neither exotic nor comic, neither
minstrelized nor microscopically analyzed. I wanted to redirect, reinvent the
political, cultural, and artistic judgments saved for African American
writers.
         
I was living in Queens while I wrote Sula,  commuting to Manhattan to an
office job, leavin g my children to child-minders and the public school in the
fall and winter , to my parents in the summer , and was so strapped for
money that the condition moved from debilitating stress to hilarity . Every
rent payment was an event; every shopping trip a triumph of caution over
the reckless purchase of a staple. The best news was that this was the
condition of every other single/ separated female parent I knew . The things
we traded! Time, food, money , clothes, laughter , memory—and daring.
Daring especiall y, because in the late sixties, with so many dead, detained,
or silenc ed, there could be no turning back simply because there was no
“back” back there. Cut adrift, so to speak, we found it possible to think upthings, try things, explore. Use what was known and tried and investigate
what was not. Write a play, form a theater company , design clothes, write
fiction unencumbered by other people’ s expectations. Nobody was minding
us, so we minded ourselves. In that atmosphere of “What would you be
doing or thinking if there was no gaze or hand to stop you?”  I began to
think about just what that kind of license would have been like for us black
women forty years earlier . We were being encouraged to think of ourselves
as our own salvation, to be our own best friends. What could that mean in
1969 that it had not meant in the 1920s? The image of the woman who was
both envied and cautioned against came to mind.
Elsewhere (in an essay “Unspeakable Things Unspoken”), I have detailed
my thoughts about developing the structure of Sula.  “Originally , Sula
opened with ‘Except for World War II, nothing interfered with National
Suicide Day.’ With some enco uragement I recognized that sentence as a
false beginning.” Falseness, in this case, meant abrupt. There was no lobby ,
as it were, where the reader could be situated before being intro duced to the
goings-on of the characters. As I wrote in that essay , “The threshold
between the reader and the black-topic text need not be the safe, welcoming
lobby I persuaded myself [Sula] needed at that time. My preference was the
demolition of the lobby altogether . [Of all of my books], only Sula has this
‘entrance.’ The others refuse the ‘presentation,’ refuse the seductive safe
harbor; the line of demarcation between…them and us. Refuse, in effect, to
cater to the diminished expectations of the reader , or his or her alarm
heightened by the emotional luggage one carries into the black-topic text….
[Although] the bulk of the openi ng I finally wrote is about the community , a
view of it…the view is not from  within…but from the point of view of a
stranger—the ‘valley man’ who might happen to be there and to and for
whom all this is mightily strange, even exotic….[In] my new first sentence
I am introducing an outside-the- circle reader into the circle. I am translating
the anon ymous into the specific, a ‘place’ into a ‘neighborhood’ and letting
a stranger in, through whose eyes it can be viewed.” This defere nce, paid to
the “white” gaze, was the one time I addressed the “problem.”
Had I begun with Shadrack, as originally planned, I would have ignored
the gentle welcome and put the reader into immediate confrontation withhis wounded mind. It would have called greater attention to the traumatic
displacement this most wastefu l capitalist war had on black people, and
thrown into relief their desper ate and desperately creative strategies of
survival. In the revised opening I tried to represent discriminatory ,
prosecutorial racial oppression as well as the community’ s efforts to remain
stable and healthy: the neighborhood has been almost completely swept
away by commercial interests (a golf course), but the remains of what
sustained it (music, dancing, craft, religion, irony , wit) are what the “valley
man,” the strang er, sees—or could have seen. It is a more inviti ng embrace
than Shadrack’ s organized public madness—it helps to unify the
neighborhood until Sula’ s anarchy challenges it.
Outlaw women are fascinating—not always for their behavior , but
because historic ally women are seen as naturally disruptive and their status
is an illegal one from birth if it is not under the rule of men. In much
literature a woman’ s escape from male rule led to regret, misery , if not
complete disaster . In Sula I wanted to explore the consequences of what that
escape might be, on not only a conventional black society , but on female
friendship. In 1969, in Queens, snatching liberty seemed compelling. Some
of us thrived; some of us died. All of us had a taste.         
In that place, where they tore the nightshade and blackberry patches from
their roots to make room for the Medallion City Golf Course, there was
once a neighborhood. It stood  in the hills above the valley town of
Medallion and spread all the way to the river. It is called the suburbs now,
but when black people lived there it was called the Bottom. One road,
shaded by beeches, oaks, maple s and chestnuts, connected it to the valley .
The beeches are gone now, and so are the pear trees where children sat and
yelled down through the blossoms to passersby . Generous funds have been
allotted to level the stripped and faded buildings that clutter the road from
Medallion up to the golf course.  They are going to raze the Time and a Half
Pool Hall, where feet in long tan shoes once pointed down from chair rungs.
A steel ball will knock to dust Irene’ s Palace of Cosmetol ogy, where
women used to lean their head s back on sink trays and doze while Irene
lathered Nu Nile into their hair. Men in khaki work clothes will pry loose
the slats of Reba’ s Grill, where  the owner cooked in her hat because she
couldn’ t remember the ingredients without it.
There will be nothing left of the Bottom (the footbridge that crossed the
river is already gone), but perhaps it is just as well, since it wasn’ t a town
anyway: just a neighborhood where on quiet days people in valley houses
could hear singing sometimes,  banjos sometimes, and, if a valley man
happened to have business up in those hills—collecting rent or insurance
payments—he might see a dark woman in a flowered dress doing a bit of
cakewalk, a bit of black bottom , a bit of “messing around” to the lively
notes of a mouth organ. Her bare feet would raise the saffron dust that
floated down on the coveralls and bunion-split shoes of the man breathing
music in and out of his harmon ica. The black people watching her would
laugh and rub their knees, and it would be easy for the valley man to hear
the laughter and not notice the adult pain that rested somewhere under the
eyelids, somewh ere under their head rags and soft felt hats, somewhere inthe palm of the hand, somewhe re behind the frayed lapels, somewhere in
the sinew’ s curve. He’d have  to stand in the back of Greater Saint
Matthew’ s and let the tenor ’s voice dress him in silk, or touch the hands of
the spoon carvers (who had not worked in eight years) and let the fingers
that danced on wood kiss his skin. Otherwise the pain would escape him
even though the laughter was part of the pain.
A shucking, knee-slapping, wet-eyed laughter that could even describe
and explain how they came to be where they were.
A joke. A nigge r joke. That was the way it got started. Not the town, of
course, but that part of town where the Negroes lived, the part they called
the Bottom in spite of the fact that it was up in the hills. Just a nigger joke.
The kind white folks tell when the mill closes down and they’re  looking for
a little comfort somewhere. The kind colored folks tell on themselves when
the rain doesn’ t come, or comes for weeks, and they’re looking for a little
comfort somehow .
A good white farmer promised freedom and a piece of bottom land to his
slave if he would perform some very difficult chores. Whe n the slave
completed the work, he asked the farmer to keep his end of the bargain.
Freedom was easy—the farmer had no objection to that. But he didn’ t want
to give up any land. So he told the slave that he was very sorry that he had
to give him valley land. He had hoped to give him a piece of the Bottom.
The slave blink ed and said he thought valley land was bottom  land. The
master said, “Oh, no! See those hills? That’ s bottom land, rich and fertile.”
“But it’ s high up in the hills,” said the slave.
“High up from us,” said the master , “but when God looks down, it’s the
bottom. That’ s why we call it so. It’s the bottom of heaven—best land there
is.”
So the slave pressed his master to try to get him some. He prefe rred it to
the valle y. And it was done. The nigger got the hilly land, where planting
was backbreaking, where the soil slid down and washed away  the seeds,
and where the wind lingered all through the winter .Which accounted for the fact that white people lived on the rich valley
floor in that little river town in Ohio, and the blacks populat ed the hills
above it, taking small consolat ion in the fact that every day they could
literally look down on the white folks.
Still, it was lovely up in the Bottom. After the town grew and the farm
land turned into a village and the village into a town and the streets of
Medallion were hot and dusty with progress, those heavy trees that
sheltered the shacks up in the Bottom were wonderful to see. And the
hunters who went there sometim es wondered in private if maybe the white
farmer was right after all. Maybe it was the bottom of heaven.
The black peop le would have disagreed, but they had no time to think
about it. They were mightily preoccupied with earthly things —and each
other , wondering even as early as 1920 what Shadrack was all about, what
that little girl Sula who grew into a woman in their town was all about, and
what they themselves were all about, tucked up there in the Bottom.         
1919
Except for World War II, nothing ever interfered with the celebration of
National Suicide Day. It had taken place every January third since 1920,
although Shadra ck, its founder , was for many years the only celebrant.
Blasted and permanently astonished by the events of 1917, he had returned
to Medallion handsome but ravaged, and even the most fastidio us people in
the town sometimes caught themselves dreaming of what he must have
been like a few years back before he went off to war. A young man of
hardly twenty, his head full of nothing and his mouth recalling the taste of
lipstick, Shadrack had found himself in December , 1917, running with his
comrades across  a field in France. It was his first encounter with the enemy
and he didn’ t know whether his company was running toward them or
away . For sever al days they had been marching, keeping close to a stream
that was frozen at its edges. At one point they crossed it, and no sooner had
he stepped foot on the other side than the day was adangle with shouts and
explosions. Shellfire was all around him, and though he knew that this was
something called it, he could not muster up the proper feeling—the feeling
that would accommodate it. He expected to be terrified or exhilarated—to
feel something  very strong. In fact, he felt only the bite of a nail in his boot,
which pierced the ball of his foot whenever he came down on it. The day
was cold enough to make his breath visible, and he wondered for a moment
at the purity and whiteness of his own breath among the dirty, gray
explosions surrounding him. He ran, bayonet fixed, deep in the great sweepof men flying across this field. Wincing at the pain in his foot, he turned his
head a little to the right and saw the face of a soldier near him fly off.
Before he could register shock,  the rest of the soldier ’s head disappeared
under the inverted soup bowl of his helmet. But stubbornly , taking no
direction from the brain, the body of the headless soldier ran on, with
energy and grace, ignoring altogether the drip and slide of brain tissue down
its back.
         
When Shadrack  opened his eyes he was propped up in a small bed. Before
him on a tray was a large tin plate divided into three triangles. In one
triangle was rice, in another meat, and in the third stewed tomatoes. A small
round depression held a cup of whitish liquid. Shadrack stared at the soft
colors that filled these triangles: the lumpy whiteness of rice, the quivering
blood tomatoes, the grayish-brown meat. All their repugnance was
contained in the neat balance of the triangles—a balance that soothed him,
transferred some of its equilibrium to him. Thus reassured that the white,
the red and the brown would stay where they were—would not explode or
burst forth from their restricted zones—he suddenly felt hungry and looked
around for his hands. His glance was cautious at first, for he had to be very
careful—anything could be anywhere. Then he noticed two lumps beneath
the beige blanket on either side of his hips. With extreme care he lifted one
arm and was relieved to find his hand attached to his wrist. He tried the
other and found it also. Slowly  he directed one hand toward the cup and,
just as he was about to spread his fingers, they began to grow in higgledy-
piggledy fashion  like Jack’ s beanstalk all over the tray and the bed. With a
shriek he closed his eyes and thrust his huge growing hands under the
covers. Once out of sight they seemed to shrink back to their normal size.
But the yell had brought a male nurse.
“Private? We’re not going to have any trouble today , are we? Are we,
Private?”
Shadrack looked  up at a balding man dressed in a green-cotton jacket and
trousers. His hair was parted low on the right side so that some twenty orthirty yellow hairs could discreetly cover the nakedness of his head.
“Come on. Pick up that spoon. Pick it up, Private. Nobody is going to
feed you forever .”
Sweat slid from  Shadrack’ s armpits down his sides. He could not bear to
see his hands grow again and he was frightened of the voice in the apple-
green suit.
“Pick it up, I said. There’ s no point to this…” The nurse reach ed under
the cove r for Shadrack’ s wrist to pull out the monstrous hand. Shadrack
jerked it back and overturned the tray. In panic he raised himself to his
knees and tried to fling off and away his terrible fingers, but succeeded only
in knocking the nurse into the next bed.
When they bound Shadrack into a straitjacket, he was both relieved and
grateful, for his hands were at last hidden and confined to whatever size
they had attained.
Laced and silent in his small bed, he tried to tie the loose cords in his
mind. He wanted desperately to see his own face and connect it with the
word “private”—the word the nurse (and the others who helped bind him)
had called him. “Private” he thought was something secret, and he
wondered why they looked at him and called him a secret. Still, if his hands
behaved as they had done, what might he expect from his face? The fear
and longing were too much for him, so he began to think of other things.
That is, he let his mind slip into whatever cave mouths of memory it chose.
He saw a windo w that looked out on a river which he knew was full of
fish. Someone was speaking softly just outside the door…
         
Shadrack’ s earlier violence had coincided with a memorandum from the
hospital executive staff in reference to the distribution of patie nts in high-
risk areas. There was clearly a demand for space. The priority or theviolence earned Shadrack his release, $217 in cash, a full suit of clothes and
copies of very of ficial-looking papers.
When he stepped out of the hospital door the grounds overwhel med him:
the cropped shrubbery , the edged lawns, the undeviating walks. Shadrack
looked at the cement stretches: each one leading clearheadedly to some
presumably desirable destination. There were no fences, no warnings, no
obstacles at all between concrete and green grass, so one could easily ignore
the tidy sweep of stone and cut out in another direction—a direction of
one’s own.
Shadrack stood at the foot of the hospital steps watching the heads of
trees tossing ruefully but harmlessly , since their trunks were rooted too
deeply in the earth to threaten him. Only the walks made him uneasy . He
shifted his weight, wondering how he could get to the gate without stepping
on the concrete. While plotting his course—where he would have to leap,
where to skirt a clump of bush es—a loud guffaw startled him. Two men
were going up the steps. Then he noticed that there were many people
about, and that he was just now seeing them, or else they had just
materialized. They were thin slips, like paper dolls floating down the walks.
Some were seated in chairs with wheels, propelled by other paper figures
from behind. All seemed to be smoking, and their arms and legs curved in
the breeze. A good high wind would pull them up and away and they would
land perhaps among the tops of the trees.
Shadrack took the plunge. Four steps and he was on the grass heading for
the gate. He kept his head down to avoid seeing the paper people swerving
and bending here and there, and he lost his way. When he looked  up, he was
standing by a low red building separated from the main building by a
covered walkway . From somewh ere came a sweetish smell which reminded
him of somethin g painful. He looked around for the gate and saw that he
had gone directl y away from it in his complicated journey over the grass.
Just to the left of the low buildin g was a graveled driveway that appeared to
lead outside the grounds. He trotted quickly to it and left, at last, a haven of
more than a year , only eight days of which he fully recollected.Once on the road, he headed west. The long stay in the hospital had left
him weak—too weak to walk steadily on the gravel shoulders of the road.
He shuffled, grew dizzy , stoppe d for breath, started again, stumbling and
sweating but refusing to wipe his temples, still afraid to look at his hands.
Passengers in dark, square cars shuttered their eyes at what they took to be a
drunken man.
The sun was already directly over his head when he came to a town. A
few blocks of shaded streets and he was already at its heart—a pretty ,
quietly regulated downtown.
Exhausted, his feet clotted with pain, he sat down at the curbside to take
off his shoes. He closed his eyes to avoid seeing his hands and fumbled
with the laces of the heavy high-topped shoes. The nurse had tied them into
a double knot, the way one does for children, and Shadrack, long
unaccustomed to the manipulation of intricate things, could not get them
loose. Uncoordi nated, his fingernails tore away at the knots. He fought a
rising hysteria that was not merely anxiety to free his aching feet; his very
life depended on the release of the knots. Suddenly without raising his
eyelids, he began to cry. Twenty-two years old, weak, hot, frightened, not
daring to acknowledge the fact that he didn’ t even know who or what he
was…with no past, no language , no tribe, no source, no address book, no
comb, no pencil, no clock, no pocket handkerchief, no rug, no bed, no can
opener , no faded postcard, no soap, no key, no tobacco pouch, no soiled
underwear and nothing nothing nothing to do…he was sure of one thing
only: the unchecked monstrosity of his hands. He cried sound lessly at the
curbside of a small Midwestern town wondering where the window was,
and the river , and the soft voices just outside the door…
Through his tears he saw the fingers joining the laces, tentatively at first,
then rapidly . The four fingers of each hand fused into the fabric, knotted
themselves and zigzagged in and out of the tiny eyeholes.
By the time the police drove up, Shadrack was suffering from a blinding
headache, which was not abated by the comfort he felt when the policemen
pulled his hands away from what he thought was a permanent entanglementwith his shoelac es. They took him to jail, booked him for vagrancy and
intoxication, and locked him in a cell. Lying on a cot, Shadrack  could only
stare helplessly at the wall, so paralyzing was the pain in his head. He lay in
this agony for a long while and then realized he was staring at the painted-
over letters of a command to fuck himself. He studied the phrase  as the pain
in his head subsided.
Like moonlight stealing under a window shade an idea insinuated itself:
his earlier desire to see his own face. He looked for a mirror ; there was
none. Finally , keeping his hands carefully behind his back he made his way
to the toilet bowl and peeped in. The water was unevenly lit by the sun so
he could make nothing out. Returning to his cot he took the blanket and
covered his head, rendering the water dark enough to see his reflection.
There in the toilet water he saw a grave black face. A black so definite, so
unequivocal, it astonished him. He had been harboring a skittish
apprehension that he was not real—that he didn’ t exist at all. But when the
blackness greete d him with its indisputable presence, he wanted nothing
more. In his joy he took the risk of letting one edge of the blanket drop and
glanced at his hands. They were still. Courteously still.
Shadrack rose and returned to the cot, where he fell into the first sleep of
his new life. A sleep deeper than the hospital drugs; deeper than the pits of
plums, steadier than the condo r’s wing; more tranquil than the curve of
eggs.
The sheriff looked through the bars at the young man with the matted
hair. He had read through his prisoner ’s papers and hailed a farmer. When
Shadrack awoke , the sherif f handed him back his papers and escorted him
to the back of a wagon. Shadrack got in and in less than three hours he was
back in Medallio n, for he had been only twenty-two miles from his window ,
his river , and his soft voices just outside the door .
In the back of the wagon, supported by sacks of squash and hills of
pumpkins, Shadrack began a struggle that was to last for twelve days, a
struggle to order and focus expe rience. It had to do with making a place for
fear as a way of controlling it. He knew the smell of death and was terrifiedof it, for he could not anticipate it. It was not death or dying that frightened
him, but the unexpectedness of both. In sorting it all out, he hit on the
notion that if one day a year were devoted to it, everybody could get it out
of the way and the rest of the year would be safe and free. In this manner he
instituted National Suicide Day .
         
On the third day of the new year, he walked through the Bottom down
Carpenter ’s Road with a cowbell and a hangman’ s rope calling the people
together . Telling  them that this was their only chance to kill themselves or
each other .
At first the peop le in the town were frightened; they knew Shadrack was
crazy but that did not mean that he didn’ t have any sense or, even more
important, that he had no power . His eyes were so wild, his hair so long and
matted, his voice was so full of authority and thunder that he caused panic
on the first, or Charter , Nation al Suicide Day in 1920. The next one, in
1921, was less frightening but still worrisome. The people had seen him a
year now in between. He lived  in a shack on the riverbank that had once
belonged to his grandfather long time dead. On Tuesday and Friday he sold
the fish he had caught that morning, the rest of the week he was drunk,
loud, obscene, funny and outrag eous. But he never touched anybody , never
fought, never caressed. Once the people understood the boundaries and
nature of his madness, they could fit him, so to speak, into the scheme of
things.
Then, on subsequent National Suicide Days, the grown people looked out
from behind curtains as he rang his bell; a few stragglers increased their
speed, and little children scream ed and ran. The tetter heads tried goading
him (although he was only four or five years older then they)  but not for
long, for his curses were stingingly personal.
As time went along, the people took less notice of these January thirds, or
rather they thought they did, thought they had no attitudes or feelings one
way or another about Shadrack ’s annual solitary parade. In fact they hadsimply stopped remarking on the holiday because they had absorbed it into
their thoughts, into their language, into their lives.
Someone said to a friend, “You sure was a long time delivering that baby .
How long was you in labor?”
And the friend answered, “’Bout three days. The pains started on Suicide
Day and kept up till the followi ng Sunday . Was borned on Sunday . All my
boys is Sunday boys.”
Some lover said to his bride-to-be, “Let’ s do it after New Years, ’stead of
before. I get paid New Y ear’s Eve.”
And his sweetheart answered, “OK, but make sure it ain’t on Suicide
Day. I ain’t ’bout to be listening to no cowbells whilst the weddin’s going
on.”
Somebody’ s grandmother said her hens always started a laying of double
yolks right after Suicide Day .
Then Reverend Deal took it up, saying the same folks who had sense
enough to avoid Shadrack’ s call were the ones who insisted on drinking
themselves to death or womanizing themselves to death. “May’ s well go on
with Shad and save the Lamb the trouble of redemption.”
Easily , quietly , Suicide Day became a part of the fabric of life up in the
Bottom of Medallion, Ohio.         
1920
It had to be as far away from the Sundown House as possib le. And her
grandmother ’s middle-aged nephew who lived in a Northern town called
Medallion was the one chance she had to make sure it would be. The red
shutters had haunted both Helene Sabat and her grandmother for sixteen
years. Helene was born behind those shutters, daughter of a Creole whore
who worked there. The grandmother took Helene away from the soft lights
and flowered carpets of the Sundown House and raised her under the
dolesome eyes of a multicolo red Virgin Mary , counseling  her to be
constantly on guard for any sign of her mother ’s wild blood.
So when Wiley Wright came to visit his Great Aunt Cecile in New
Orleans, his enchantment with the pretty Helene became a marriage
proposal—under the pressure of both women. He was a seaman (or rather a
lakeman, for he was a ship’ s cook on one of the Great Lakes lines), in port
only three days out of every sixteen.
He took his bride to his home in Medallion and put her in a lovely house
with a brick porch and real lace curtains at the window . His long absences
were quite bearable for Helene  Wright, especially when, after some nine
years of marriage, her daughter was born.
Her daughter was more comfort and purpose than she had ever hoped to
find in this life. She rose grandl y to the occasion of motherhoo d—grateful,deep down in her heart, that the child had not inherited the great  beauty that
was hers: that her skin had dusk in it, that her lashes were substantial but
not undignified in their length, that she had taken the broad flat nose of
Wiley (although Helene expecte d to improve it somewhat) and his generous
lips.
Under Helene’ s hand the girl became obedient and polite. Any
enthusiasms that little Nel showed were calmed by the mother until she
drove her daughter ’s imagination under ground.
Helene Wright was an impressive woman, at least in Medallion she was.
Heavy hair in a bun, dark eyes arched in a perpetual query about other
people’ s manners. A woman who won all social battles with presence and a
conviction of the legitimacy of her authority . Since there was no Catholic
church in Medallion then, she joined the most conservative black church.
And held sway . It was Helene who never turned her head in church when
latecomers arriv ed; Helene who established the practice of seasonal altar
flowers; Helene who introduced the giving of banquets of welcome to
returning Negro veterans. She lost only one battle—the pronunciation of her
name. The peop le in the Botto m refused to say Helene. They  called her
Helen W right and left it at that.
All in all her life was a satisfactory one. She loved her house and enjoyed
manipulating her daughter and her husband. She would sigh sometimes just
before falling asleep, thinking that she had indeed come far enough away
from the Sundown House.
So it was with extremely mixed emotions that she read a letter from Mr.
Henri Martin describing the illness of her grandmother , and suggesting she
come down right away . She didn’ t want to go, but could not bring herself to
ignore the silent plea of the woman who had rescued her .
It was November . November , 1920. Even in Medallion there was a
victorious swagg er in the legs of white men and a dull-eyed excitement in
the eyes of colored veterans.Helene thought about the trip South with heavy misgiving but decided
that she had the best protection: her manner and her bearing, to which she
would add a beautiful dress. She bought some deep-brown wool and three-
fourths of a yard of matching velvet. Out of this she made herself a heavy
but elegant dress with velvet collar and pockets.
Nel watched her mother cutting the pattern from newspapers and moving
her eyes rapidly from a magazin e model to her own hands. She watched her
turn up the kerosene lamp at sunset to sew far into the night.
The day they were ready , Helene cooked a smoked ham, left a note for
her lake-bound husband, in case he docked early , and walked head high and
arms stif f with luggage ahead of her daughter to the train depot.
It was a longe r walk than she remembered, and they saw the train
steaming up just as they turned the corner . They ran along the track looking
for the coach pointed out to them by the colored porter . Even at that they
made a mistake.  Helene and her daughter entered a coach peopl ed by some
twenty white men and women. Rather than go back and down the three
wooden steps again, Helene decided to spare herself some embarrassment
and walk on through to the colored car. She carried two pieces  of luggage
and a string purse; her daughter carried a covered basket of food.
As they opened the door marked COLORED ONL Y, they saw a white
conductor coming toward them. It was a chilly day but a light skim of sweat
glistened on the woman’ s face as she and the little girl struggled to hold the
door open, hang on to their luggage and enter all at once. The conductor let
his eyes travel over the pale yellow woman and then stuck his little finger
into his ear , jiggling it free of wax. “What you think you doin’, gal?”
Helene looked up at him.
So soon . So soon. She hadn’ t even begun the trip back. Back to her
grandmother ’s house in the city where the red shutters glowed, and already
she had been called “gal.” All the old vulnerabilities, all the old fears of
being somehow  flawed gathered in her stomach and made her hands
tremble. She had heard only that one word; it dangled above her wide-brimmed hat, which had slipped , in her exertion, from its carefully leveled
placement and was now tilted in a bit of a jaunt over her eye.
Thinking he wanted her tickets, she quickly dropped both the cowhide
suitcase and the straw one in order to search for them in her purse. An
eagerness to please and an apology for living met in her voice. “I have
them. Right here somewhere, sir…”
The conductor looked at the bit of wax his fingernail had retrieved.
“What was you doin’ back in there? What was you doin’ in that coach
yonder?”
Helene licked her lips. “Oh…I…” Her glance moved beyond the white
man’ s face to the passengers seated behind him. Four or five black faces
were watching, two belonging to soldiers still in their shit-colored uniforms
and peak ed caps. She saw their closed faces, their locked eyes, and turned
for compassion to the gray eyes of the conductor .
“We made a mistake, sir. You see, there wasn’ t no sign. We just got in the
wrong car , that’ s all. Sir .”
“We don’ t ’low no mistakes on this train. Now git your butt on in there.”
He stood there staring at her until she realized that he wanted her to move
aside. Pulling Nel by the arm, she pressed herself and her daugh ter into the
foot space in front of a wooden seat. Then, for no earthly reason , at least no
reason that anybody could understand, certainly no reason that Nel
understood then or later, she smiled. Like a street pup that wags its tail at
the very doorjamb of the butche r shop he has been kicked away from only
moments before , Helene smiled. Smiled dazzlingly and coquettishly at the
salmon-colored face of the conductor .
Nel looked away from the flash  of pretty teeth to the other passengers.
The two black soldiers, who had been watching the scene with what
appeared to be indif ference, now looked stricken. Behind Nel was the bright
and blazing light of her mother ’s smile; before her the midnight eyes of the
soldiers. She saw the muscles of their faces tighten, a movement under theskin from blood to marble. No change in the expression of the eyes, but a
hard wetness that veiled them as they looked at the stretch of her mother ’s
foolish smile.
As the door slam med on the conductor ’s exit, Helene walked down the
aisle to a seat. She looked about for a second to see whether any of the men
would help her put the suitcase s in the overhead rack. Not a man moved.
Helene sat down , fussily , her back toward the men. Nel sat opposite, facing
both her mother  and the soldiers, neither of whom she could look at. She
felt both pleased and ashamed to sense that these men, unlike her father ,
who worshiped his graceful, beautiful wife, were bubbling with a hatred for
her mother that had not been there in the beginning but had been born with
the dazzling smile. In the silence that preceded the train’ s heave, she looked
deeply at the folds of her mother ’s dress. There in the fall of the heavy
brown wool she held her eyes. She could not risk letting them travel upward
for fear of seein g that the hook s and eyes in the placket of the dress had
come undone and exposed the custard-colored skin underneath. She stared
at the hem, wanting to believe in its weight but knowing that custard was all
that it hid. If this tall, proud woman, this woman who was very particular
about her friends, who slipped into church with unequaled elegance, who
could quell a roustabout with a look, if she were really custard, then there
was a chance that Nel was too.
It was on that train, shuffling toward Cincinnati, that she resolved to be
on guard—always. She wanted to make certain that no man ever looked at
her that way. That no midnight eyes or marbled flesh would ever accost her
and turn her into jelly .
For two days they rode; two days of watching sleet turn to rain, turn to
purple sunsets, and one night knotted on the wooden seats (their heads on
folded coats), trying not to hear the snoring soldiers. When they changed
trains in Birmingham for the last leg of the trip, they disco vered what
luxury they had been in throug h Kentucky and Tennessee, where the rest
stops had all had colored toilets. After Birmingham there were none.
Helene’ s face was drawn with the need to relieve herself, and so intensewas her distress she finally brought herself to speak about her problem to a
black woman with four children who had got on in T uscaloosa.
“Is there somewhere we can go to use the restroom?”
The woman looked up at her and seemed not to understand. “Ma’am?”
Her eyes fasten ed on the thick  velvet collar , the fair skin, the high-tone
voice.
“The restroom,” Helene repeated. Then, in a whisper , “The toilet.”
The woman pointed out the window and said, “Y es, ma’am. Y onder .”
Helene looked out of the wind ow halfway expecting to see a comfort
station in the distance; instead she saw gray-green trees leaning over
tangled grass. “Where?”
“Yonder ,” the woman said. “Meridian. We be pullin’ in direc’l in.” Then
she smiled sympathetically and asked, “Kin you make it?”
Helene nodded and went back to her seat trying to think of other  things—
for the surest way to have an accident would be to remem ber her full
bladder .
At Meridian the women got out with their children. While Helen e looked
about the tiny stationhouse for a door that said COLORED WOMEN , the
other woman stalked off to a field of high grass on the far side of the track.
Some white men were leaning on the railing in front of the stationhouse. It
was not only their tongues curling around toothpicks that kept Helene from
asking informat ion of them. She looked around for the other woman and,
seeing just the top of her head rag in the grass, slowly realized where
“yonder” was. All of them, the fat woman and her four children , three boys
and a girl, Helene and her daughter , squatted there in the four o’clock
Meridian sun. They did it again in Ellisville, again in Hattiesbur g, and by
the time they reached Slidell, not too far from Lake Pontchartr ain, Helene
could not only fold leaves as well as the fat woman, she never felt a stir asshe passed the muddy eyes of the men who stood like wrecked Dorics under
the station roofs of those towns.
The lift in spirit that such an accomplishment produced in her quickly
disappeared when the train finally pulled into New Orleans.
         
Cecile Sabat’ s house leaned between two others just like it on Elysian
Fields. A Frenchified shotgun house, it sported a magnificent garden in the
back and a tiny wrought-iron fence in the front. On the door hung a black
crepe wreath with purple ribbon. They were too late. Helene reached up to
touch the ribbon , hesitated, and knocked. A man in a collarless shirt opened
the door. Helene identified herself and he said he was Henri Martin and that
he was there for the settin’-up. They stepped into the house. The Virgin
Mary clasped her hands in front of her neck three times in the front room
and once in the bedroom where Cecile’ s body lay. The old woman had died
without seeing or blessing her granddaughter .
No one other than Mr. Martin seemed to be in the house, but a sweet odor
as of gardenias told them that someone else had been. Blotting her lashes
with a white handkerchief, Hele ne walked through the kitchen to the back
bedroom where she had slept for sixteen years. Nel trotted along behind,
enchanted with the smell, the candles and the strangeness. When Helene
bent to loosen the ribbons of Nel’s hat, a woman in a yellow dress came out
of the garden and onto the back  porch that opened into the bedroom. The
two wom en looked at each other. There was no recognition in the eyes of
either . Then Helene said, “This is your…grandmother , Nel.” Nel looked at
her mother and then quickly back at the door they had just come out of.
“No. That was your great-grandmother . This is your grandmother . My…
mother .”
Before the child could think, her words were hanging in the gardenia air.
“But she looks so young.”The woman in the canary-yellow dress laughed and said she was forty-
eight, “an old forty-eight.”
Then it was she who carried the gardenia smell. This tiny woman with
the softn ess and glare of a canary . In that somber house that held four
Virgin Marys, where death sighed in every corner and candles sputtered, the
gardenia smell and canary-yellow dress emphasized the funeral atmosphere
surrounding them.
The wom an smiled, glanced in the mirror and said, throwing her voice
toward Helene, “That your only one?”
“Yes,” said Helene.
“Pretty . A lot like you.”
“Yes. W ell. She’ s ten now .”
“Ten? V rai? Small for her age, no?”
Helene shrugge d and looked at her daughter ’s questioning eyes. The
woman in the yellow dress leaned forward. “Come. Come, chere.”
Helene interrupted. “We have to get cleaned up. We been three days on
the train with no chance to wash or…”
“Comment t’appelle?”
“She doesn’ t talk Creole.”
“Then you ask her .”
“She wants to know your name, honey .”
With her head pressed into her mother ’s heavy brown dress, Nel told her
and then asked, “What’ s yours?”“Mine’ s Rochel le. Well. I must  be going on.” She moved closer to the
mirror and stood there sweepin g hair up from her neck back into its halo-
like roll, and wetting with spit the ringlets that fell over her ears. “I been
here, you know , most of the day. She pass on yesterday . The funeral
tomorrow . Henri takin’ care.” She struck a match, blew it out and darkened
her eyeb rows with the burnt head. All the while Helene and Nel watched
her. The one in a rage at the folded leaves she had endured, the wooden
benches she had slept on, all to miss seeing her grandmother and seeing
instead that painted canary who never said a word of greeting or affection
or…
Rochelle continu ed. “I don’t know what happen to de house. Long time
paid for. You be thinkin’ on it? Oui?” Her newly darkene d eyebrows
queried Helene.
“Oui.” Helene’ s voice was chilly . “I be thinkin’ on it.”
“Oh, well. Not for me to say…”
Suddenly she swept around and hugged Nel—a quick embrace tighter
and harder than one would have imagined her thin soft arms capable of.
“’Voir! ’V oir!” and she was gone.
In the kitchen, being soaped head to toe by her mother , Nel ventured an
observation. “She smelled so nice. And her skin was so soft.”
Helene rinsed the cloth. “Much handled things are always soft.”
“What does ‘vwah’ mean?”
“I don’t know ,” her mother said. “I don’t talk Creole.” She gazed at her
daughter ’s wet buttocks. “And neither do you.”
         When they got back to Medallio n and into the quiet house they saw the note
exactly where they had left it and the ham dried out in the icebox.
“Lord, I’ve never been so glad to see this place. But look at the dust. Get
the rags, Nel. Oh, never mind. Let’s breathe awhile first. Lord, I never
thought I’d get back here safe and sound. Whoo. Well, it’s over. Good and
over. Praise His name. Look at that. I told that old fool not to deliver any
milk and there’ s the can curdle d to beat all. What gets into people? I told
him not to. Well, I got other things to worry ’bout. Got to get a fire started. I
left it ready so I wouldn’ t have  to do nothin’ but light it. Lord, it’s cold.
Don’ t just sit there, honey . You could be pulling your nose…”
Nel sat on the red-velvet sofa listening to her mother but remembering
the smell and the tight, tight hug of the woman in yellow who rubbed
burned matches over her eyes.
Late that night after the fire was made, the cold supper eaten, the surface
dust removed, Nel lay in bed thinking of her trip. She remembered clearly
the urine running down and into her stockings until she learned how to
squat properly; the disgust on the face of the dead woman and the sound of
the funeral drums. It had been an exhilarating trip but a fearful one. She had
been frightened of the soldiers’ eyes on the train, the black wreath on the
door, the custard pudding she believed lurked under her mother ’s heavy
dress, the feel of unknown streets and unknown people. But she had gone
on a real trip, and now she was different. She got out of bed and lit the lamp
to look in the mirror . There was her face, plain brown eyes, three braids and
the nose her mother hated. She looked for a long time and suddenly a shiver
ran through her .
“I’m me,” she whispered. “Me.”
Nel didn’t know quite what she meant, but on the other hand she knew
exactly what she meant.
“I’m me. I’m not their daughter . I’m not Nel. I’m me. Me.”Each time she said the word me there was a gathering in her like power ,
like joy, like fear. Back in bed with her discovery , she stared out the
window at the dark leaves of the horse chestnut.
“Me,” she murmured. And then, sinking deeper into the quilts, “I want…
I want to be…wonderful. Oh, Jesus, make me wonderful.”
The many experiences of her trip crowded in on her. She slept. It was the
last as well as the first time she was ever to leave Medallion.
For days afterward she imagined other trips she would take, alone
though, to faraway places. Contemplating them was delicious. Leaving
Medallion would be her goal. But that was before she met Sula, the girl she
had seen for five years at Garfield Primary but never played with, never
knew , because her mother said that Sula’ s mother was sooty . The trip,
perhaps, or her new found me-ness, gave her the strength to cultivate a
friend in spite of her mother .
When Sula first visited the Wright house, Helene’ s curdled scorn turned
to butter . Her daughter ’s friend seemed to have none of the mother ’s
slackness. Nel, who regarded the oppressive neatness of her home with
dread, felt comf ortable in it with Sula, who loved it and woul d sit on the
red-velvet sofa for ten to twent y minutes at a time—still as dawn. As for
Nel, she preferred Sula’ s woolly house, where a pot of something was
always cooking on the stove; where the mother , Hannah, never scolded or
gave directions; where all sorts of people dropped in; where newspapers
were stacked in the hallway , and dirty dishes left for hours at a time in the
sink, and where a one-legged grandmother named Eva handed you goobers
from deep inside her pockets or read you a dream.         
1921
Sula Peace lived in a house of many rooms that had been built over a period
of five years to the specifications of its owner , who kept on adding things:
more stairways— there were three sets to the second floor—more rooms,
doors and stoops. There were rooms that had three doors, others that opened
out on the porch only and were inaccessible from any other part of the
house; others that you could get to only by going through somebody’ s
bedroom. The creator and sovereign of this enormous house with the four
sickle-pear trees  in the front yard and the single elm in the back yard was
Eva Peace, who sat in a wagon on the third floor directing the lives of her
children, friends, strays, and a constant stream of boarders. Fewer than nine
people in the town remembere d when Eva had two legs, and her oldest
child, Hannah, was not one of them. Unless Eva herself introduced the
subject, no one ever spoke of her disability; they pretended to ignore it,
unless, in some mood of fancy , she began some fearful story about it—
generally to entertain children. How the leg got up by itself one day and
walked on of f. How she hobbled after it but it ran too fast. Or how she had a
corn on her toe and it just grew and grew and grew until her whole foot was
a corn and then it traveled on up her leg and wouldn’ t stop growing until
she put a red rag at the top but by that time it was already at her knee.
Somebody said Eva stuck it under a train and made them pay off.
Another said she sold it to a hospital for $10,000—at whic h Mr. Reedopened his eyes and asked, “Nig ger gal legs goin’ for $10,000 a piece? ” as
though he could understand $10,000 a pair—but for one?
Whatever the fate of her lost leg, the remaining one was magn ificent. It
was stockinged and shod at all times and in all weather . Once in a while she
got a felt slipper for Christmas or her birthday , but they soon disappeared,
for Eva always wore a black laced-up shoe that came well abov e her ankle.
Nor did she wear overlong dresses to disguise the empty place  on her left
side. Her dresses were mid-calf so that her one glamorous leg was always in
view as well as the long fall of space below her left thigh. One of her men
friends had fashioned a kind of wheelchair for her: a rocking-chair top fitted
into a large child’ s wagon. In this contraption she wheeled around the room,
from bedside to dresser to the balcony that opened out the north side of her
room or to the window that looked out on the back yard. The wagon was so
low that children  who spoke to her standing up were eye level with her, and
adults, standing or sitting, had to look down at her. But they didn’t know it.
They all had the impression that they were looking up at her, up into the
open distances of her eyes, up into the soft black of her nostri ls and up at
the crest of her chin.
Eva had married a man named BoyBoy and had three children: Hannah,
the eldest, and Eva, whom she named after herself but called Pearl, and a
son named Ralph, whom she called Plum.
         
After five years of a sad and disgruntled marriage BoyBoy took off. During
the time they were together he was very much preoccupied with other
women and not home much. He did whatever he could that he liked, and he
liked womanizin g best, drinking second, and abusing Eva third. When he
left in Novembe r, Eva had $1.65 , five eggs, three beets and no idea of what
or how to feel. The children needed her; she needed money , and needed to
get on with her life. But the demands of feeding her three children were so
acute she had to postpone her anger for two years until she had both the
time and the energy for it. She was confused and desperately hungry . There
were very few black families in those low hills then. The Suggs, who livedtwo hundred yards down the road, brought her a warm bowl of peas, as
soon as they found out, and a plate of cold bread. She thanked them and
asked if they had a little milk for the older ones. They said no, but Mrs.
Jackson, they knew , had a cow still giving. Eva took a bucket over and Mrs.
Jackson told her to come back and fill it up in the morning, because the
evening milking  had already been done. In this way, things went on until
near December . People were very willing to help, but Eva felt she would
soon run her welcome out; winters were hard and her neighbors were not
that much better  off. She would  lie in bed with the baby boy, the two girls
wrapped in quilts on the floor , thinking. The oldest child, Hannah, was five
and too young to take care of the baby alone, and any housewor k Eva could
find would keep her away from them from five thirty or earlier in the
morning until dark—way past eight. The white people in the valley weren’ t
rich enough then to want maids; they were small farmers and tradesmen and
wanted hard-labor help if anything. She thought also of returning to some of
her people in Virginia, but to come home dragging three young ones would
have to be a step one rung before death for Eva. She would have to
scrounge around and beg through the winter , until her baby was at least nine
months old, then she could plant and maybe hire herself out to valley farms
to weed or sow or feed stock until something steadier came along at harvest
time. She thought she had probably been a fool to let BoyBoy haul her
away from her people, but it had seemed so right at the time. He worked for
a white carpente r and toolsmith who insisted on BoyBoy’ s accompanying
him when he went West and set up in a squinchy little town called
Medallion. BoyBoy brought his new wife and built them a one-room cabin
sixty feet back from the road that wound up out of the valley , on up into the
hills and was named for the man he worked for. They lived there a year
before they had an outhouse.
Sometime before the middle of December , the baby , Plum, stopped
having bowel movements. Eva massaged his stomach and gave him warm
water . Somethin g must be wron g with my milk, she thought. Mrs. Suggs
gave her castor oil, but even that didn’ t work. He cried and fought so they
couldn’ t get much down his throat anyway . He seemed in great pain and his
shrieks were pitched high in outrage and suffering. At one point, maddened
by his own crying, he gagged, choked and looked as though he wasstrangling to death. Eva rushed to him and kicked over the earthen slop jar,
washing a small area of the floor with the child’ s urine. She managed to
soothe him, but when he took up the cry again late that night, she resolved
to end his misery once and for all. She wrapped him in blankets, ran her
finger around the crevices and sides of the lard can and stumbled to the
outhouse with him. Deep in its darkness and freezing stench she squatted
down, turned the baby over on her knees, exposed his buttocks  and shoved
the last bit of food she had in the world (besides three beets)  up his ass.
Softening the insertion with the dab of lard, she probed with her middle
finger to loosen his bowels. Her fingernail snagged what felt like a pebble;
she pulle d it out and others follo wed. Plum stopped crying as the black hard
stools ricocheted onto the frozen ground. And now that it was over, Eva
squatted there wondering why she had come all the way out there to free his
stools, and what was she doing down on her haunches with her beloved
baby boy warmed by her body in the almost total darkness, her shins and
teeth freezing, her nostrils assailed. She shook her head as though to juggle
her brains around, then said aloud, “Uh uh. Nooo.” Thereupon she returned
to the house and her bed. As the grateful Plum slept, the silence allowed her
to think.
Two days later she left all of her children with Mrs. Suggs, saying she
would be back the next day .
Eighteen months later she swept down from a wagon with two crutches, a
new black pocketbook, and one leg. First she reclaimed her children, next
she gave the surprised Mrs. Suggs a ten-dollar bill, later she started building
a house on Carpenter ’s Road, sixty feet from BoyBoy’ s one-room cabin,
which she rented out.
         
When Plum was three years old, BoyBoy came back to town and paid her a
visit. When Eva got the word that he was on his way, she made some
lemonade. She had no idea what  she would do or feel during that encounter .
Would she cry, cut his throat, beg him to make love to her? She couldn’ timagine. So she just waited to see. She stirred lemonade in a green pitcher
and waited.
BoyBoy danced up the steps and knocked on the door .
“Come on in,” she hollered.
He opened the door and stood smiling, a picture of prosperity and good
will. His shoes were a shiny orange, and he had on a citified straw hat, a
light-blue suit, and a cat’s-head stickpin in his tie. Eva smiled and told him
to sit himself down. He smiled too.
“How you been, girl?”
“Pretty fair. What you know good?” When she heard those words come
out of her own mouth she knew that their conversation would start off
polite. Although it remained to be seen whether she would still run the ice
pick through the cat’ s-head pin.
“Have some lemonade.”
“Don’ t mind if I do.” He swept his hat off with a satisfied gesture. His
nails were long and shiny . “Sho is hot, and I been runnin’ around all day .”
Eva looked out of the screen door and saw a woman in a pea-green dress
leaning on the smallest pear tree. Glancing back at him, she was reminded
of Plum’ s face when he manag ed to get the meat out of a walnut all by
himself. Eva smiled again, and poured the lemonade.
Their conversation was easy: she catching him up on all the gossip, he
asking about this one and that one, and like everybody else avoiding any
reference to her leg. It was like talking to somebody’ s cousin who just
stopped by to say howdy before getting on back to wherever he came from.
BoyBoy didn’ t ask to see the children, and Eva didn’ t bring them into the
conversation.After a while he rose to go. Talking about his appointments and exuding
an odor of new money and idlen ess, he danced down the steps and strutted
toward the pea-green dress. Eva watched. She looked at the back of his
neck and the set of his shoulders. Underneath all of that shine she saw
defeat in the stalk of his neck and the curious tight way he held his
shoulders. But still she was not sure what she felt. Then he leaned forward
and whispered into the ear of the woman in the green dress. She was still
for a moment and then threw back her head and laughed. A high-pitched
big-city laugh that reminded Eva of Chicago. It hit her like a sledge
hammer , and it was then that she knew what to feel. A liquid trail of hate
flooded her chest.
Knowing that she would hate him long and well filled her with pleasant
anticipation, like when you know you are going to fall in love with
someone and you wait for the happy signs. Hating BoyBoy , she could get
on with it, and have the safety , the thrill, the consistency of that hatred as
long as she wanted or needed it to define and strengthen her or protect her
from routine vulnerabilities. (Once when Hannah accused her of hating
colored people, Eva said she only hated one, Hannah’ s father BoyBoy , and
it was hating him that kept her alive and happy .)
Happy or not, after BoyBoy’ s visit she began her retreat to her bedroom,
leaving the bottom of the house  more and more to those who lived there:
cousins who were passing through, stray folks, and the many , many newly
married couples she let rooms to with housekeeping privileges, and after
1910 she didn’ t willingly set foot on the stairs but once and that was to light
a fire, the smoke of which was in her hair for years.
         
Among the tenants in that big old house were the children Eva took in.
Operating on a private scheme of preference and prejudice, she sent off for
children she had seen from the balcony of her bedroom  or whose
circumstances she had heard about from the gossipy old men who came to
play checkers or read the Courier , or write her number . In 1921, when her
granddaughter Sula was eleven, Eva had three such children. They camewith woolen caps and names given to them by their mothers, or
grandmothers, or somebody’ s best friend. Eva snatched the caps off their
heads and ignor ed their names. She looked at the first child closely , his
wrists, the shape of his head and the temperament that showed in his eyes
and said, “Well. Look at Dewey . My my mymymy .” When later that same
year she sent for a child who kept falling down off the porch across the
street, she said the same thing. Somebody said, “But, Miss Eva, you calls
the other one Dewey .”
“So? This here’ s another one.”
When the third one was brought and Eva said “Dewey” again, everybody
thought she had simply run out of names or that her faculties had finally
softened.
“How is anybody going to tell them apart?” Hannah asked her .
“What you need to tell them apart for? They’ s all deweys.”
When Hannah asked the question it didn’ t sound very bright, because
each dewey was markedly different from the other two. Dewey one was a
deeply black boy with a beautiful head and the golden eyes of chronic
jaundice. Dewe y two was light-skinned with freckles everyw here and a
head of tight red hair. Dewey three was half Mexican with chocolate skin
and black bangs. Besides, they were one and two years apart in age. It was
Eva saying things like, “Send one of them deweys out to get me some
Garret, if they don’t have Garret, get Buttercup,” or, “Tell them deweys to
cut out that noise,” or, “Come here, you dewey you,” and, “Send me a
dewey ,” that gave Hannah’ s question its weight.
Slowly each boy came out of whatever cocoon he was in at the time his
mother or somebody gave him away, and accepted Eva’s view , becoming in
fact as well as in name a dewey—joining with the other two to become a
trinity with a plural name…inseparable, loving nothing and no one but
themselves. When the handle from the icebox fell off, all the deweys got
whipped, and in dry-eyed silence watched their own feet as they turned
their behinds high up into the air for the stroke. When the golden-eyeddewey was ready for school he would not go without the others. He was
seven, freckled dewey was five, and Mexican dewey was only four. Eva
solved the probl em by having them all sent off together . Mr. Buckland Reed
said, “But one of them’ s only four .”
“How you know? They all come here the same year ,” Eva said.
“But that one there was one year old when he came, and that was three
years ago.”
“You don’t know how old he was when he come here and neither do the
teacher . Send ’em.”
The teacher was startled but not unbelieving, for she had long ago given
up trying to fathom the ways of the colored people in town. So when Mrs.
Reed said that their names were Dewey King, that they were cousins, and
all were six years old, the teach er gave only a tiny sigh and wrote them in
the record book  for the first grade. She too thought she would have no
problem distingu ishing among them, because they looked nothing alike, but
like everyone else before her , she gradually found that she could not tell one
from the other . The deweys would not allow it. They got all mixed up in her
head, and finally  she could not literally believe her eyes. They  spoke with
one voice, thought with one mind, and maintained an annoying privacy .
Stouthearted, surly , and wholly unpredictable, the deweys remained a
mystery not only during all of their lives in Medallion but after as well.
The deweys came in 1921, but the year before Eva had given a small
room off the kitchen to Tar Baby , a beautiful, slight, quiet man who never
spoke above a whisper . Most people said he was half white, but Eva said he
was all white. That she knew blood when she saw it, and he didn’ t have
none. When he first came to Medallion, the people called him Pretty
Johnnie, but Eva looked at his milky skin and cornsilk hair and out of a
mixture of fun and meanness called him Tar Baby . He was a mountain boy
who stayed to himself, botherin g no one, intent solely on drinking himself
to death. At first he worked in a poultry market, and after wringing the
necks of chicken s all day, he came home and drank until he slept. Later hebegan to miss days at work and frequently did not have his rent money .
When he lost his job altogether , he would go out in the morning, scrounge
around for money doing odd jobs, bumming or whatever , and come home to
drink. Because he was no bother , ate little, required nothing, and was a
lover of cheap wine, no one found him a nuisance. Besides, he frequently
went to Wednes day-night praye r meetings and sang with the sweetest hill
voice imaginable “In the Sweet By-and-By .” He sent the deweys out for his
liquor and spent most of his time in a heap on the floor or sitting in a chair
staring at the wall.
Hannah worried about him a little, but only a very little. For it soon
became clear that he simply wanted a place to die privately but not quite
alone. No one thought of suggesting to him that he pull himself together or
see a doctor or anything. Even the women at prayer meeting who cried
when he sang “In the Sweet By-and-By” never tried to get him to
participate in the church activities. They just listened to him sing, wept and
thought very graphically of their own imminent deaths. The people either
accepted his own evaluation of his life, or were indifferent to it. There was,
however , a measure of contempt in their indifference, for they had little
patience with people who took themselves that seriously . Serio usly enough
to try to die. And it was natural that he, after all, became the first one to join
Shadrack—T ar Baby and the deweys—on National Suicide Day .
         
Under Eva’s distant eye, and prey to her idiosyncrasies, her own children
grew up stealthily: Pearl married  at fourteen and moved to Flint, Michigan,
from where she posted frail letters to her mother with two dollars folded
into the writing paper . Sad little nonsense letters about minor troubles, her
husband’ s job and who the children favored. Hannah married a laughing
man named Rekus who died when their daughter Sula was about three years
old, at which time Hannah moved back into her mother ’s big house
prepared to take care of it and her mother forever .
With the excepti on of BoyBoy , those Peace women loved all men. It was
manlove that Eva bequeathed to her daughters. Probably , people said,because there were no men in the house, no men to run it. But actually that
was not true. The Peace women simply loved maleness, for its own sake.
Eva, old as she was, and with one leg, had a regular flock of gentleman
callers, and although she did not participate in the act of love, there was a
good deal of teasing and pecking and laughter . The men wanted to see her
lovely calf, that neat shoe, and watch the focusing that sometimes swept
down out of the distances in her eyes. They wanted to see the joy in her face
as they settled down to play checkers, knowing that even when she beat
them, as she almost always did, somehow , in her presence, it was they who
had won someth ing. They would read the newspaper aloud to her and make
observations on its content, and Eva would listen feeling no obligation to
agree and, in fact, would take them to task about their interpretation of
events. But she argued with them with such an absence of bile, such a
concentration of manlove, that they felt their convictions solidified by her
disagreement.
With other people’ s affairs Eva was equally prejudiced about men. She
fussed interminably with the brides of the newly wed coup les for not
getting their men’s supper ready on time; about how to launder shirts, press
them, etc. “Y o’ man be here direc’lin. Ain’ t it ’bout time you got busy?”
“Aw, Miss Eva. It’ll be ready . We just having spaghetti.”
“Again?” Eva’s eyebrows fluted up and the newlywed pressed her lips
together in shame.
Hannah simply refused to live without the attentions of a man, and after
Rekus’ death had a steady sequence of lovers, mostly the husb ands of her
friends and neighbors. Her flirting was sweet, low and guilele ss. Without
ever a pat of the hair, a rush to change clothes or a quick application of
paint, with no gesture whatsoe ver, she rippled with sex. In her same old
print wraparound, barefoot in the summer , in the winter her feet in a man’ s
leather slippers with the backs  flattened under her heels, she made men
aware of her behind, her slim ankles, the dew-smooth skin and the
incredible length of neck. Then the smile-eyes, the turn of the head—all so
welcoming, light and playful. Her voice trailed, dipped and bowed; shegave a chord to the simplest words. Nobody , but nobody , could say “hey
sugar” like Hannah. When he heard it, the man tipped his hat down a little
over his eyes, hoisted his trousers and thought about the hollow place at the
base of her neck. And all this without the slightest confusion about work
and responsibili ties. While Eva tested and argued with her men, leaving
them feeling as though they had been in combat with a worthy , if amiable,
foe, Hannah rubbed no edges, made no demands, made the man feel as
though he were complete and wonderful just as he was—he didn’ t need
fixing—and so he relaxed and swooned in the Hannah-light that shone on
him simply because he was. If the man entered and Hannah was carrying a
coal scuttle up from the basement, she handled it in such a way that it
became a gesture of love. He made no move to help her with it simply
because he wanted to see how her thighs looked when she bent to put it
down, knowing that she wanted him to see them too.
But since in that crowded house there were no places for private and
spontaneous lovemaking, Hannah would take the man down into the cellar
in the summer where it was cool back behind the coal bin and the
newspapers, or in the winter they would step into the pantry and stand up
against the shelv es she had filled with canned goods, or lie on the flour sack
just under the rows of tiny green peppers. When those places were not
available, she would slip into the seldom-used parlor , or even up to her
bedroom. She liked the last place least, not because Sula slept in the room
with her but because her love mate’ s tendency was always to fall asleep
afterward and Hannah was fastidious about whom she slept with. She
would fuck practically anything , but sleeping with someone implied for her
a measure of trust and a definit e commitment. So she ended up a daylight
lover , and it was only once actually that Sula came home from school and
found her mother in the bed, curled spoon in the arms of a man.
Seeing her step so easily into the pantry and emer ge looking precisely as
she did when she entered, only happier , taught Sula that sex was pleasant
and frequent, but otherwise unremarkable. Outside the house, where
children giggled about underwear , the message was different. So she
watched her mother ’s face and the face of the men when they opened the
pantry door and made up her own mind.Hannah exasper ated the women in the town—the “good” women, who
said, “One thing I can’t stand is a nasty woman” the whores, who were hard
put to find trade among black men anyway and who resente d Hannah’ s
generosity; the middling wom en, who had both husbands and affairs,
because Hannah  seemed too unlike them, having no passion attached to her
relationships and being wholly incapable of jealousy . Hannah’ s friendships
with women were, of course, seldom and short-lived, and the newly married
couples whom her mother took in soon learned what a hazard she was. She
could break up a marriage before it had even become one—she would make
love to the new groom and wash  his wife’ s dishes all in an afternoon. What
she wanted, after Rekus died, and what she succeeded in having more often
than not, was some touching every day .
The men, surprisingly , never gossiped about her. She was unquestionably
a kind and gener ous woman and that, coupled with her extraordi nary beauty
and funky elegance of manner , made them defend her and protect her from
any vitriol that newcomers or their wives might spill.
Eva’s last child, Plum, to whom she hoped to bequeath everything,
floated in a constant swaddle of love and af fection, until 1917 when he went
to war. He returned to the States in 1919 but did not get back to Medallion
until 1920. He wrote letters from New York, Washington, D.C., and
Chicago full of promises of homecomings, but there was obviously
something wrong. Finally some two or three days after Christmas, he
arrived with just the shadow of his old dip-down walk. His hair had been
neither cut nor combed in month s, his clothes were pointless and he had no
socks. But he did have a black bag, a paper sack, and a sweet, sweet smile.
Everybody welc omed him and gave him a warm room next to Tar Baby’ s
and waited for him to tell them whatever it was he wanted them to know .
They waited in vain for his telling but not long for the knowing . His habits
were much like Tar Baby’ s but there were no bottles, and Plum was
sometimes cheerful and animated. Hannah watched and Eva waited. Then
he began to steal from them, take trips to Cincinnati and sleep for days in
his room with the record player going. He got even thinner , since he ate
only snatches of things at begin nings or endings of meals. It was Hannah
who found the bent spoon black from steady cooking.         
So late one night in 1921, Eva got up from her bed and put on her clothes.
Hoisting herself up on her crutc hes, she was amazed to find that she could
still manage them, although the pain in her armpits was severe. She
practiced a few steps around the room, and then opened the door. Slowly ,
she manipulated  herself down the long flights of stairs, two crutches under
her left arm, the right hand grasping the banister . The sound of her foot
booming in comparison to the delicate pat of the crutch tip. On each landing
she stopped for breath. Annoye d at her physical condition, she closed her
eyes and removed the crutches from under her arms to relieve the
unaccustomed pressure. At the foot of the stairs she redistributed  her weight
between the crutches and swooped on through the front room, to the dining
room, to the kitchen, swinging and swooping like a giant heron, so graceful
sailing about in its own habitat but awkward and comical when  it folded its
wings and tried to walk. With a swing and a swoop she arrived at Plum’ s
door and pushed it open with the tip of one crutch. He was lying in bed
barely visible in the light coming from a single bulb. Eva swung  over to the
bed and propped  her crutches at its foot. She sat down and gathered Plum
into her arms. He woke, but only slightly .
“Hey , man. Hey. You holdin’ me, Mamma?” His voice was drowsy and
amused. He chuckled as though  he had heard some private joke. Eva held
him closer and began to rock. Back and forth she rocked him, her eyes
wandering around his room. There in the corner was a half-eaten store-
bought cherry pie. Balled-up candy wrappers and empty pop bottles peeped
from under the dresser . On the floor by her foot was a glass of strawberry
crush and a Liberty  magazine. Rocking, rocking, listening to Plum’ s
occasional chuckles, Eva let her memory spin, loop and fall. Plum in the tub
that time as she leaned over him. He reached up and dripped water into her
bosom and laughed. She was angry , but not too, and laughed with him.
“Mamma, you so purty . You so purty , Mamma.”
Eva lifted her tongue to the edge of her lip to stop the tears from  running
into her mouth. Rocking, rockin g. Later she laid him down and looked athim a long time. Suddenly she was thirsty and reached for the glass of
strawberry crush. She put it to her lips and discovered it was blood-tainted
water and threw it to the floor . Plum woke up and said, “Hey, Mamma,
whyn’ t you go on back to bed? I’m all right. Didn’ t I tell you? I’m all right.
Go on, now .”
“I’m going, Plum,” she said. She shifted her weight and pulled her
crutches toward  her. Swinging and swooping, she left his room. She
dragged herself to the kitchen and made grating noises.
Plum on the rim of a warm light sleep was still chuckling. Mam ma. She
sure was somethin’. He felt twilight. Now there seemed to be some kind of
wet light traveling over his legs and stomach with a deeply attractive smell.
It wound itself—this wet light— all about him, splashing and running into
his skin. He opened his eyes and saw what he imagined was the great wing
of an eagle pouring a wet lightn ess over him. Some kind of baptism, some
kind of blessing, he thought. Everything is going to be all right, it said.
Knowing that it was so he closed his eyes and sank back into the bright hole
of sleep.
Eva stepped back from the bed and let the crutches rest under her arms.
She rolled a bit of newspaper into a tight stick about six inches long, lit it
and threw it onto the bed where the kerosene-soaked Plum lay in snug
delight. Quickly , as the whoosh  of flames engulfed him, she shut the door
and made her slow and painful journey back to the top of the house.
Just as she got to the third landing she could hear Hannah and some
child’ s voice. She swung along, not even listening to the voices of alarm
and the cries of the deweys. By the time she got to her bed someone was
bounding up the stairs after her. Hannah opened the door. “Plum! Plum!
He’s burning, Mamma! W e can’ t even open the door! Mamma!”
Eva looked into Hannah’ s eyes. “Is? My baby? Burning?” The two
women did not speak, for the eyes of each were enough for the other . Then
Hannah closed hers and ran toward the voices of neighbors calling for
water .         
1922
It was too cool for ice cream. A hill wind was blowing dust and empty
Camels wrapper s about their ankles. It pushed their dresses into the creases
of their behinds , then lifted the hems to peek at their cotton underwear .
They were on their way to Edna  Finch’ s Mellow House, an ice-c ream parlor
catering to nice folks—where even children would feel comfortable, you
know , even though it was right next to Reba’ s Grill and just one block down
from the Time and a Half Pool Hall. It sat in the curve of Carpe nter’s Road,
which, in four blocks, made up all the sporting life available in the Bottom.
Old men and young ones draped themselves in front of the Elmira Theater ,
Irene’ s Palace of Cosmetology , the pool hall, the grill and the other sagging
business enterpr ises that lined the street. On sills, on stoops, on crates and
broken chairs they sat tasting their teeth and waiting for something to
distract them. Every passerby , every motorcar , every alteratio n in stance
caught their attention and was commented on. Particularly they watched
women. When a woman approa ched, the older men tipped their hats; the
younger ones opened and close d their thighs. But all of them, whatever
their age, watched her retreating view with interest.
Nel and Sula walked through this valley of eyes chilled by the wind and
heated by the embarrassment of appraising stares. The old men looked at
their stalklike legs, dwelled on the cords in the backs of their knees and
remembered old dance steps they had not done in twenty years. In their lust,which age had turned to kindnes s, they moved their lips as though to stir up
the taste of young sweat on tight skin.
Pig meat. The words were in all their minds. And one of them, one of the
young ones, said it aloud. Softly but definitively and there was no mistaking
the compliment.  His name was Ajax, a twenty-one-year -old pool haunt of
sinister beauty . Graceful and economical in every movement, he held a
place of envy with men of all ages for his magnificently foul mouth. In fact
he seldom cursed, and the epithets he chose were dull, even harmless. His
reputation was derived from the way he handled the words. When he said
“hell” he hit the h with his lungs and the impact was greater than the
achievement of the most imaginative foul mouth in the town. He could say
“shit” with a nastiness impossible to imitate. So, when he said “pig meat” as
Nel and Sula passed, they guarded their eyes lest someone see their delight.
It was not really Edna Finch’ s ice cream that made them brave the stretch
of those panther eyes. Years later their own eyes would glaze as they
cupped their chins in remembrance of the inchworm smiles, the squatting
haunches, the track-rail legs straddling broken chairs. The cream-colored
trousers marking with a mere seam the place where the mystery curled.
Those smooth vanilla crotches invited them; those lemon-yellow gabardines
beckoned to them.
They moved toward the ice-c ream parlor like tightrope walkers, as
thrilled by the possibility of a slip as by the maintenance of tension and
balance. The least sideways glance, the merest toe stub, could pitch them
into those creamy haunches spread wide with welcome. Somewhere
beneath all of that daintiness, chambered in all that neatness, lay the thing
that clotted their dreams.
Which was only fitting, for it was in dreams that the two girls had first
met. Long before Edna Finch’ s Mellow House opened, even before they
marched throug h the chocolate halls of Garfield Primary School out onto
the playground and stood facing each other through the ropes  of the one
vacant swing (“Go on.” “No. You go.”), they had already made each other ’s
acquaintance in the delirium of their noon dreams. They were solitary littlegirls whose loneliness was so profound it intoxicated them and sent them
stumbling into Technicolored visions that always included a presence, a
someone, who, quite like the dreamer , shared the delight of the dream.
When Nel, an only child, sat on the steps of her back porch surrounded by
the high silence of her mothe r’s incredibly orderly house, feeling the
neatness pointing at her back, she studied the poplars and fell easily into a
picture of herself lying on a flowered bed, tangled in her own hair, waiting
for some fiery prince. He approached but never quite arrived. But always,
watching the dream along with her, were some smiling sympa thetic eyes.
Someone as interested as she herself in the flow of her imagined hair, the
thickness of the mattress of flowers, the voile sleeves that closed below her
elbows in gold-threaded cuf fs.
Similarly , Sula,  also an only child, but wedged into a household of
throbbing disor der constantly awry with things, people, voices and the
slamming of doors, spent hours in the attic behind a roll of linoleum
galloping through her own mind on a gray-and-white horse tasting sugar
and smelling roses in full view of a someone who shared both the taste and
the speed.
So when they met, first in those chocolate halls and next through the
ropes of the swing, they felt the ease and comfort of old frien ds. Because
each had discov ered years before that they were neither white nor male, and
that all freedom and triumph was forbidden to them, they had set about
creating someth ing else to be. Their meeting was fortunate, for it let them
use each other to grow on. Daughters of distant mothers and
incomprehensible fathers (Sula’ s because he was dead; Nel’s because he
wasn’ t), they found in each other ’s eyes the intimacy they were looking for .
Nel Wright and Sula Peace were both twelve in 1922, wishbone thin and
easy-assed. Nel was the color of wet sandpaper—just dark enough to escape
the blows of the pitch-black truebloods and the contempt of old women
who worried about such things as bad blood mixtures and knew that the
origins of a mule and a mulatto  were one and the same. Had she been any
lighter -skinned she would have needed either her mother ’s protection on the
way to school or a streak of mean to defend herself. Sula was a heavybrown with large quiet eyes, one of which featured a birthmark  that spread
from the middle of the lid toward the eyebrow , shaped something like a
stemmed rose. It gave her otherwise plain face a broken excitement and
blue-blade threat like the keloid scar of the razored man who sometimes
played checkers  with her grandmother . The birthmark was to grow darker
as the years passed, but now it was the same shade as her gold-flecked eyes,
which, to the end, were as steady and clean as rain.
Their friendship was as intense as it was sudden. They found relief in
each other ’s personality . Although both were unshaped, formless things,
Nel seemed stronger and more consistent than Sula, who could hardly be
counted on to sustain any emotion for more than three minutes. Yet there
was one time when that was not true, when she held on to a mood for
weeks, but even that was in defense of Nel.
Four white boys in their early teens, sons of some newly arrived Irish
people, occasionally entertained themselves in the afternoon by harassing
black schoolchildren. With shoes that pinched and woolen knickers that
made red rings on their calves , they had come to this valley with their
parents believin g as they did that it was a promised land—green and
shimmering with welcome. What they found was a strange accent, a
pervasive fear of their religion and firm resistance to their attempts to find
work. With one exception the older residents of Medallion scorned them.
The one exception was the black community . Although some of the
Negroes had been in Medallion before the Civil War (the town didn’ t even
have a name then), if they had any hatred for these newcomers it didn’ t
matter because it didn’ t show . As a matter of fact, baiting them was the one
activity that the white Protestan t residents concurred in. In part their place
in this world was secured only when they echoed the old residents’ attitude
toward blacks.
These particular boys caught Nel once, and pushed her from hand to hand
until they grew tired of the frightened helpless face. Because of that
incident, Nel’s route home from  school became elaborate. She, and then
Sula, managed to duck them for weeks until a chilly day in Nove mber when
Sula said, “Let’ s us go on home the shortest way .”Nel blinked, but acquiesced. They walked up the street until they got to
the bend  of Carpenter ’s Road where the boys lounged on a disused well.
Spotting their prey, the boys sauntered forward as though there were
nothing in the world on their minds but the gray sky. Hardly able to control
their grins, they stood like a gate blocking the path. When the girls were
three feet in front of the boys, Sula reached into her coat pocke t and pulled
out Eva’s paring knife. The boys stopped short, exchanged  looks and
dropped all pretense of innocen ce. This was going to be better than they
thought. They were going to try and fight back, and with a knife. Maybe
they could get an arm around one of their waists, or tear…
Sula squatted down in the dirt road and put everything down on the
ground: her lunchpail, her reader , her mittens, her slate. Holding the knife in
her right hand, she pulled the slate toward her and pressed her left
forefinger down  hard on its edge. Her aim was determined but inaccurate.
She slashed off only the tip of her finger . The four boys stared open-
mouthed at the wound and the scrap of flesh, like a button mushroom,
curling in the cherry blood that ran into the corners of the slate.
Sula raised her eyes to them. Her voice was quiet. “If I can do that to
myself, what you suppose I’ll do to you?”
The shifting dirt was the only way Nel knew that they were  moving
away; she was looking at Sula’ s face, which seemed miles and miles away .
But toughness was not their quality—adventuresomeness was—and a
mean determination to explore everything that interested them, from one-
eyed chickens high-stepping in their penned yards to Mr. Buckland Reed’ s
gold teeth, from the sound of sheets flapping in the wind to the labels on T ar
Baby’ s wine bottles. And they had no priorities. They could be distracted
from watching a fight with mean razors by the glorious smell of hot tar
being poured by roadmen two hundred yards away .
In the safe harbor of each other ’s company they could afford to abandon
the ways of other people and concentrate on their own perceptions ofthings. When Mrs. Wright reminded Nel to pull her nose, she would do it
enthusiastically but without the least hope in the world.
“While you sittin’ there, honey , go ’head and pull your nose.”
“It hurts, Mamma.”
“Don’ t you want a nice nose when you grow up?”
After she met Sula, Nel slid the clothespin under the blanket as soon as
she got in the bed. And although there was still the hateful hot comb to
suffer through each Saturday evening, its consequences—smooth hair—no
longer interested her .
Joined in mutua l admiration they watched each day as though it were a
movie arranged for their amusement. The new theme they were now
discovering was men. So they met regularly , without even planning it, to
walk down the road to Edna Finch’s Mellow House, even though it was too
cool for ice cream.
         
Then summer came. A summer limp with the weight of blossomed things.
Heavy sunflowe rs weeping over fences; iris curling and browning at the
edges far away from their purple hearts; ears of corn letting their auburn
hair wind down to their stalks. And the boys. The beautiful, beautiful boys
who dotted the landscape like jewels, split the air with their shouts in the
field, and thickened the river with their shining wet backs. Even their
footsteps left a smell of smoke behind.
It was in that summer , the summer of their twelfth year, the summer of
the beautiful black boys, that they became skittish, frightened and bold—all
at the same time.
In that mercury mood in July, Sula and Nel wandered about the Bottom
barefoot looking  for mischief. They decided to go down by the river wherethe boys sometimes swam. Nel waited on the porch of 7 Carpe nter’s Road
while Sula ran into the house to go to the toilet. On the way up the stairs,
she passed the kitchen where Hannah sat with two friends,  Patsy and
Valentine. The two women were  fanning themselves and watching Hannah
put down some dough, all talking casually about one thing and another , and
had gotten around, when Sula passed by , to the problems of child rearing.
“They a pain.”
“Yeh. Wish I’d listened to mamma. She told me not to have  ’em too
soon.”
“Any time atall is too soon for me.”
“Oh, I don’t know . My Rudy minds his daddy . He just wild with me. Be
glad when he growed and gone.”
Hannah smiled and said, “Shut your mouth. You love the ground he pee
on.”
“Sure I do. But he still a pain. Can’ t help loving your own child. No
matter what they do.”
“Well, Hester grown now and I can’ t say love is exactly what I feel.”
“Sure you do. You love her, like I love Sula. I just don’t like her. That’ s
the dif ference.”
“Guess so. Likin’ them is another thing.”
“Sure. They dif ferent people, you know…”
She only heard Hannah’ s words, and the pronouncement sent her flying
up the stairs. In bewilderment, she stood at the window fingering the curtain
edge, aware of a sting in her eye. Nel’s call floated up and into the window ,
pulling her away from dark thoughts back into the bright, hot daylight.         
They ran most of the way .
Heading toward the wide part of the river where trees grouped
themselves in families darkening the earth below . They passed some boys
swimming and clowning in the water , shrouding their words in laughter .
They ran in the sunlight, creating their own breeze, which pressed their
dresses into their damp skin. Reaching a kind of square of four leaf-locked
trees which promised cooling, they flung themselves into the four-cornered
shade to taste their lip sweat and contemplate the wildness that had come
upon them so suddenly . They lay in the grass, their foreheads almost
touching, their bodies stretche d away from each other at a 180-degree
angle. Sula’s head rested on her arm, an undone braid coiled  around her
wrist. Nel leaned on her elbows and worried long blades of grass with her
fingers. Undern eath their dresses flesh tightened and shivered in the high
coolness, their small breasts just now beginning to create some pleasant
discomfort when they were lying on their stomachs.
Sula lifted her head and joined Nel in the grass play. In concer t, without
ever meeting each other ’s eyes, they stroked the blades up and down, up
and down. Nel found a thick twig and, with her thumbnail, pulled away its
bark until it was stripped to a smooth, creamy innocence. Sula looked about
and found one too. When both twigs were undressed Nel moved easily to
the next stage and began tearing up rooted grass to make a bare spot of
earth. When a generous clearing was made, Sula traced intricate  patterns in
it with her twig. At first Nel was content to do the same. But soon she grew
impatient and poked her twig rhythmically and intensely into the earth,
making a small neat hole that grew deeper and wider with the least
manipulation of her twig. Sula copied her, and soon each had a hole the size
of a cup. Nel began a more strenuous digging and, rising to her knee, was
careful to scoop out the dirt as she made her hole deeper . Together they
worked until the two holes were one and the same. When the depression
was the size of a small dishpan, Nel’s twig broke. With a gesture of disgust
she threw the pieces into the hole they had made. Sula threw hers in too.Nel saw a bottle  cap and tossed it in as well. Each then looked around for
more debris to throw into the hole: paper , bits of glass, butts of cigarettes,
until all of the small defiling things they could find were collected there.
Carefully they replaced the soil and covered the entire grave with uprooted
grass.
Neither one had spoken a word.
They stood up, stretched, then gazed out over the swift dull water as an
unspeakable restlessness and agitation held them. At the same instant each
girl heard footsteps in the grass. A little boy in too big knickers was coming
up from the lower bank of the river. He stopped when he saw them and
picked his nose.
“Your mamma tole you to stop eatin’ snot, Chicken,” Nel holler ed at him
through cupped hands.
“Shut up,” he said, still picking.
“Come up here and say that.”
“Leave him ’lone, Nel. Com e here, Chicken. Lemme show you
something.”
“Naw .”
“You scared we gone take your bugger away?”
“Leave him ’lone, I said. Come on, Chicken. Look. I’ll help you climb a
tree.”
Chicken looked at the tree Sula was pointing to—a big double beech with
low branches and lots of bends for sitting.
He moved slowly toward her .
“Come on, Chicken, I’ll help you up.”Still picking his nose, his eyes wide, he came to where they were
standing. Sula took him by the hand and coaxed him along. When they
reached the base of the beech, she lifted him to the first branch, saying, “Go
on. Go on. I got you.” She followed the boy, steadying him, when he
needed it, with her hand and her reassuring voice. When they were as high
as they could go, Sula pointed to the far side of the river .
“See? Bet you never saw that far before, did you?”
“Uh uh.”
“Now look down there.” They both leaned a little and peered through the
leaves at Nel standing below , squinting up at them. From their height she
looked small and foreshortened.
Chicken Little laughed.
“Y’all better come on down before you break your neck,” Nel hollered.
“I ain’ t never coming down,” the boy hollered back.
“Yeah. W e better . Come on, Chicken.”
“Naw . Lemme go.”
“Yeah, Chicken. Come on, now .”
Sula pulled his leg gently .
“Lemme go.”
“OK, I’m leavin’ you.” She started on.
“Wait!” he screamed.
Sula stopped and together they slowly worked their way down.Chicken was still elated. “I was way up there, wasn’ t I? Wasn’t I? I’m a
tell my brovver .”
Sula and Nel began to mimic him: “I’m a tell my brovver; I’m a tell my
brovver .”
Sula picked him up by his hands and swung him outward then around
and around. His knickers ballooned and his shrieks of frightened joy
startled the birds and the fat grasshoppers. When he slipped from her hands
and sailed away out over the water they could still hear his bubbly laughter .
The water darkened and closed  quickly over the place where  Chicken
Little sank. The pressure of his hard and tight little fingers was still in
Sula’ s palms as she stood looking at the closed place in the water . They
expected him to come back up, laughing. Both girls stared at the water .
Nel spoke first. “Somebody saw.” A figure appeared briefly on the
opposite shore.
The only house over there was Shadrack’ s. Sula glanced at Nel. Terror
widened her nostrils. Had he seen?
The water was so peaceful now. There was nothing but the baking sun
and something newly missing. Sula cupped her face for an instant, then
turned and ran up to the little plank bridge that crossed the river to
Shadrack’ s hous e. There was no path. It was as though neither Shadrack nor
anyone else ever came this way .
Her running was swift and determined, but when she was close to the
three little steps that led to his porch, fear crawled into her stomach and
only the someth ing newly missing back there in the river made it possible
for her to walk up the three steps and knock at the door .
No one answered. She started back, but thought again of the peace of the
river. Shadrack would be inside, just behind the door ready to pounce on
her. Still she could not go back. Ever so gently she pushed the door with the
tips of her finge rs and heard only the hinges weep. More. And then she wasinside. Alone. The neatness, the order startled her, but more surprising was
the restfulness. Everything was so tiny, so common, so unthreatening.
Perhaps this was not the house of the Shad. The terrible Shad who walked
about with his penis out, who peed in front of ladies and girl-children, the
only black who could curse white people and get away with it, who drank in
the road from the mouth of the bottle, who shouted and shook in the streets.
This cottage? This sweet old cottage? With its made-up bed? With its rag
rug and wooden  table? Sula stood in the middle of the little room and in her
wonder forgot what she had come for until a sound at the door made her
jump. He was there in the doorway looking at her. She had not heard his
coming and now he was looking at her .
More in embarrassment than terror she averted her glance. When she
called up enough courage to look back at him, she saw his hand resting
upon the door frame. His fingers, barely touching the wood, were arranged
in a graceful arc. Relieved and encouraged (no one with hands like that, no
one with fingers  that curved around wood so tenderly could kill her), she
walked past him out of the door , feeling his gaze turning, turning with her .
At the edge of the porch, gathering the wisps of courage that were fast
leaving her , she turned once more to look at him, to ask him…had he…?
He was smiling, a great smile, heavy with lust and time to come. He
nodded his head as though answering a question, and said, in a pleasant
conversational tone, a tone of cooled butter , “Always.”
Sula fled down the steps, and shot through the greenness and the baking
sun back to Nel and the dark closed place in the water . There she collapsed
in tears.
Nel quieted her. “Sh, sh. Don’ t, don’t. You didn’ t mean it. It ain’t your
fault. Sh. Sh. Come on, le’s go, Sula. Come on, now. Was he there? Did he
see? Where’ s the belt to your dress?”
Sula shook her head while she searched her waist for the belt.Finally she stood up and allowed Nel to lead her away . “He said,
‘Always. Always.’”
“What?”
Sula covered her mouth as they walked down the hill. Always. He had
answered a question she had not asked, and its promise licked at her feet.
         
A bargeman, poling away from the shore, found Chicken late that afternoon
stuck in some rocks and weeds, his knickers ballooning about his legs. He
would have left him there but noticed that it was a child, not an old black
man, as it first appeared, and he prodded the body loose, netted it and
hauled it aboard. He shook his head in disgust at the kind of parents who
would drown their own children. When, he wondered, will those people
ever be anything  but animals, fit for nothing but substitutes for mules, only
mules didn’ t kill each other the way niggers did. He dumped Chicken Little
into a burlap sack and tossed him next to some egg crates and boxes of
wool cloth. Later , sitting down to smoke on an empty lard tin, still bemused
by God’ s curse and the terrible burden his own kind had of elevating Ham’ s
sons, he suddenly became alarmed by the thought that the corpse in this
heat would have a terrible odor, which might get into the fabric of his
woolen cloth. He dragged the sack away and hooked it over the side, so that
the Chicken’ s body was half in and half out of the water .
Wiping the sweat from his neck, he reported his find to the sherif f at
Porter ’s Landing, who said they didn’ t have no niggers in their county , but
that some lived  in those hills ’cross the river, up above Medallion. The
bargeman said he couldn’ t go all the way back there, it was every bit of two
miles. The sherif f said whyn’ t he throw it on back into the water . The
bargeman said he never shoulda  taken it out in the first place. Finally they
got the man who ran the ferry twice a day to agree to take it over in the
morning.That was why Chicken Little was missing for three days and didn’ t get to
the embalmer ’s until the fourth day, by which time he was unrecognizable
to almost everybody who once knew him, and even his mother wasn’ t deep
down sure, except that it just had to be him since nobody could find him.
When she saw his clothes lying on the table in the basement of the
mortuary , her mouth snapped shut, and when she saw his body her mouth
flew wide open again and it was seven hours before she was able to close it
and make the first sound.
So the cof fin was closed.
The Junior Choi r, dressed in white, sang “Nearer My God to Thee” and
“Precious Memories,” their eyes fastened on the songbooks they did not
need, for this was the first time their voices had presided at a real-life event.
Nel and Sula did not touch hand s or look at each other during the funeral.
There was a space, a separateness, between them. Nel’s legs had turned to
granite and she expected the sheriff or Reverend Deal’ s pointing finger at
any mom ent. Although she knew she had “done nothing,” she felt convicted
and hang ed right there in the pew—two rows down from her parents in the
children’ s section.
Sula simply cried. Soundlessly  and with no heaving and gasping for
breath, she let the tears roll into her mouth and slide down her chin to dot
the front of her dress.
As Reverend Deal moved into his sermon, the hands of the women
unfolded like pairs of raven’ s wings and flew high above their hats in the
air. They did not hear all of what he said; they heard the one word, or
phrase, or inflection that was for them the connection between the event and
themselves. For some it was the term “Sweet Jesus.” And they saw the
Lamb’ s eye and the truly innocent victim: themselves. They acknowledged
the innocent child hiding in the corner of their hearts, holding a sugar -and-
butter sandwich. That one. The one who lodged deep in their fat, thin, old,
young skin, and was the one the world had hurt. Or they thought of their
son newly killed and remembered his legs in short pants and wonderedwhere the bullet  went in. Or they remembered how dirty the room looked
when their father left home and wondered if that is the way the slim, young
Jew felt, he who for them was both son and lover and in whose downy face
they could see the sugar -and-but ter sandwiches and feel the oldest and most
devastating pain there is: not the pain of childhood, but the reme mbrance of
it.
Then they left their pews. For with some emotions one has to stand. They
spoke, for they were full and needed to say. They swayed, for the rivulets of
grief or of ecstasy must be rocked. And when they thought of all that life
and death locked  into that little closed coffin they danced and screamed, not
to protest God’ s will but to acknowledge it and confirm once more their
conviction that the only way to avoid the Hand of God is to get in it.
In the colored part of the cemet ery, they sank Chicken Little in between
his grandfather and an aunt. Butterflies flew in and out of the bunches of
field flowers now loosened from the top of the bier and lying in a small
heap at the edge of the grave. The heat had gone, but there was still no
breeze to lift the hair of the willows.
Nel and Sula stood some distance away from the grave, the space that
had sat between  them in the pews had dissolved. They held hands and knew
that only the coffin would lie in the earth; the bubbly laughter and the press
of finge rs in the palm would stay aboveground forever . At first, as they
stood there, their hands were clenched together . They relaxed slowly until
during the walk back home their fingers were laced in as gentle a clasp as
that of any two young girlfriends trotting up the road on a summer day
wondering what happened to butterflies in the winter .         
1923
The second strange thing was Hannah’ s coming into her mother ’s room
with an empty bowl and a peck of Kentucky Wonders and saying,
“Mamma, did you ever love us?” She sang the words like a small child
saying a piece at Easter , then knelt to spread a newspaper on the floor and
set the basket on it; the bowl she tucked in the space between her legs. Eva,
who was just sitting there fanning herself with the cardboard fan from Mr.
Hodges’ funeral parlor , listened to the silence that followed Hannah’ s
words, then said, “Scat!” to the deweys who were playing chain gang near
the window . With the shoelace s of each of them tied to the laces of the
others, they stumbled and tumbled out of Eva’ s room.
“Now ,” Eva looked up across from her wagon at her daughter . “Give me
that again. Flat out to fit my head.”
“I mean, did you? Y ou know . When we was little.”
Eva’s hand moved snail-like down her thigh toward her stump, but
stopped short of it to realign a pleat. “No. I don’t reckon I did. Not the way
you thinkin’.”
“Oh, well. I was just wonderin ’.” Hannah appeared to be through with
the subject.“An evil wonderin’ if I ever heard one.” Eva was not through.
“I didn’ t mean nothing by it, Mamma.”
“What you mean you didn’ t mean  nothing by it? How you gone not mean
something by it?”
Hannah pinched the tips off the Kentucky Wonders and snapped their
long pods. What with the sound of the cracking and snapping and her swift-
fingered movements, she seeme d to be playing a complicated instrument.
Eva watched her a moment and then said, “Y ou gone can them?”
“No. They for tonight.”
“Thought you was gone can some.”
“Uncle Paul ain’t brought me none yet. A peck ain’t enough to can. He
say he got two bushels for me.”
“Triflin’.”
“Oh, he all right.”
“Sho he all right. Everybody all right. ’Cept Mamma. Mamma  the only
one ain’ t all right. Cause she didn’ t love us.”
“Awww , Mamma.”
“Awww , Mamm a? Awww , Mamma? You settin’ here with your healthy-
ass self and ax me did I love you? Them big old eyes in your head would a
been two holes full of maggots if I hadn’ t.”
“I didn’ t mean that, Mamma. I know you fed us and all. I was talkin’
’bout something else. Like. Like. Playin’ with us. Did you ever, you know ,
play with us?”
“Play? Wasn’t nobody playin’ in 1895. Just ’cause you got it good now
you think it was always this good? 1895 was a killer , girl. Things was bad.Niggers was dying like flies. Stepping tall, ain’ t you? Uncle Paul gone bring
me two bushels. Yeh. And they’ s a melon downstairs, ain’t they? And I
bake every Saturday, and Shad brings fish on Friday , and they’ s a pork
barrel full of meal, and we float eggs in a crock of vinegar…”
“Mamma, what you talkin’ ’bout?”
“I’m talkin’ ’bout 18 and 95 when I set in that house five days with you
and Pearl and Plum and three beets, you snake-eyed ungrateful hussy . What
would I look like leapin’ ’round that little old room playin’ with youngins
with three beets to my name?”
“I know ’bout them beets, Mamma. Y ou told us that a million times.”
“Yeah? Well? Don’ t that count? Ain’t that love? You want me to tinkle
you under the jaw and forget ’bout them sores in your mouth? Pearl was
shittin’ worms and I was supposed to play rang-around-the-rosie?”
“But Mamma, they had to be some time when you wasn’ t thinkin’
’bout…”
“No time. They wasn’ t no time. Not none. Soon as I got one day done
here come a night. With you all coughin’ and me watchin’ so TB wouldn’ t
take you off and if you was sleepin’ quiet I thought, O Lord, they dead and
put my hand over your mouth to feel if the breath was comin’ what you
talkin’ ’bout did I love you girl I stayed alive for you can’t you get that
through your thick head or what is that between your ears, heifer?”
Hannah had enough beans now. With some tomatoes and hot bread, she
thought, that would be enough for everybody , especially since the deweys
didn’ t eat vegetables no how and Eva never made them and Tar Baby was
living off air and music these days. She picked up the basket and stood with
it and the bowl of beans over her mother . Eva’s face was still asking her last
question. Hannah looked into her mother ’s eyes.
“But what about Plum? What’d you kill Plum for , Mamma?”It was a Wednesday in August and the ice wagon was coming and
coming. You could hear bits of the driver ’s song. Now Mrs. Jackson would
be tipping down her porch steps. “Jes a piece. You got a lil ole piece layin’
’round in there you could spare?” And as he had since the time of the
pigeons, the iceman would hand her a lump of ice saying, “Watch it now,
Mrs. Jackson. That straw’ll tickle your pretty neck to death.”
Eva listened to the wagon coming and thought about what it must be like
in the icehouse. She leaned back a little and closed her eyes trying to see the
insides of the icehouse. It was a dark, lovely picture in this heat, until it
reminded her of that winter night in the outhouse holding her baby in the
dark, her fingers searching for his asshole and the last bit of lard scooped
from the sides of the can, held deliberately on the tip of her middle finger ,
the last bit of lard to keep from hurting him when she slid her finger in and
all because she had broken the slop jar and the rags had frozen. The last
food staple in the house she had rammed up her baby’ s behind to keep from
hurting him too much when she opened up his bowels to pull the stools out.
He had been screaming fit to kill, but when she found his hole at last and
stuck her finger up in it, the shock was so great he was suddenly quiet. Even
now on the hottest day anyone in Medallion could remember— a day so hot
flies slept and cats were splaying their fur like quills, a day so hot pregnant
wives leaned up against trees and cried, and women remembering some
three-month-old hurt put groun d glass in their lovers’ food and the men
looked at the food and wondered if there was glass in it and ate it anyway
because it was too hot to resist eating it—even on this hottest of days in the
hot spell, Eva shivered from the biting cold and stench of that outhouse.
Hannah was waiting. Watching her mother ’s eyelids. When Eva spoke at
last it was with two voices. Like two people were talking at the same time,
saying the same thing, one a fraction of a second behind the other .
“He give me such a time. Such a time. Look like he didn’ t even want to
be born. But he come on out. Boys is hard to bear. You wouldn’ t know that
but they is. It was such a carryin ’ on to get him born and to keep him alive.
Just to keep his little heart beating and his little old lungs cleared and look
like when he came back from that war he wanted to git back in. After allthat carryin’ on, just gettin’ him out and keepin’ him alive, he wanted to
crawl back in my womb and well…I ain’t got the room no more even if he
could do it. There wasn’ t space for him in my womb. And he was crawlin’
back. Being helpless and thinkin g baby thoughts and dreaming baby dreams
and messing up his pants again and smiling all the time. I had room enough
in my heart, but not in my womb, not no more. I birthed him once. I
couldn’ t do it again. He was growed, a big old thing. Godh avemercy , I
couldn’ t birth him twice. I’d be laying here at night and he be downstairs in
that room, but when I closed my eyes I’d see him…six feet tall smilin’ and
crawlin’ up the stairs quietlike so I wouldn’ t hear and opening the door soft
so I wouldn’ t hear and he’d be creepin’ to the bed trying to spread my legs
trying to get back up in my womb. He was a man, girl, a big old growed-up
man. I didn’ t have that much room. I kept on dreaming it. Dreaming it and I
knowed it was true. One night it wouldn’ t be no dream. It’d be true and I
would have done it, would have let him if I’d’ve had the room but a big
man can’t be a baby all wrap ped up inside his mamma no more; he
suffocate. I done everything I could to make him leave me and go on and
live and be a man but he wouldn’ t and I had to keep him out so I just
thought of a way he could die like a man not all scrunched up inside my
womb, but like a man.”
Eva couldn’t see Hannah clearly for the tears, but she looked up at her
anyway and said, by way of apology or explanation or perhaps just by way
of neatness, “But I held him close first. Real close. Sweet Plum . My baby
boy.”
Long after Hannah turned and walked out of the room, Eva continued to
call his name while her fingers lined up the pleats in her dress.
Hannah went off to the kitchen, her old man’ s slippers plopping down the
stairs and over the hardwood floors. She turned the spigot on, letting water
break up the tight knots of Kentucky Wonders and float them to the top of
the bowl. She swirled them about with her fingers, poured the water off and
repeated the process. Each time the green tubes rose to the surface she felt
elated and collected whole handfuls at a time to drop in twos  and threes
back into the water .Through the window over the sink she could see the deweys still playing
chain gang; their ankles bound  one to the other , they tumbled, struggled
back to their feet and tried to walk single file. Hens strutted by with one
suspicious eye on the deweys, another on the brick fireplace where sheets
and mason jars were boiled. Only the deweys could play in this heat.
Hannah put the Kentucky Wonders over the fire and, struck by a sudden
sleepiness, she went off to lie down in the front room. It was even hotter
there, for the windows were shut to keep out the sunlight. Hannah
straightened the shawl that draped the couch and lay down. She dreamed of
a wedding in a red bridal gown until Sula came in and woke her .
But before the second strange thing, there had been the wind, which was
the first. The very night before the day Hannah had asked Eva if she had
ever loved them , the wind tore over the hills rattling roofs and loosening
doors. Everythin g shook, and although the people were frightened they
thought it meant rain and welcomed it. Windows fell out and trees lost
arms. People waited up half the night for the first crack of lightning. Some
had even uncov ered barrels to catch the rain water , which they loved to
drink and cook in. They waited in vain, for no lightning no thunder no rain
came. The wind  just swept through, took what dampness there was out of
the air, messed up the yards, and went on. The hills of the Bottom, as
always, protected the valley part of town where the white people lived, and
the next morning all the people were grateful because there was a dryer
heat. So they set about their work early , for it was canning time, and who
knew but what the wind would come back this time with a cooli ng rain. The
men who worked in the valley got up at four thirty in the morning and
looked at the sky where the sun was already rising like a hot white bitch.
They beat the brims of their hats against their legs before putting them on
and trudged down the road like old promises nobody wanted kept.
On Thursday , when Hannah brought Eva her fried tomatoes and soft
scrambled eggs with the white left out for good luck, she mentioned her
dream of the wedding in the red dress. Neither one bothered to look it up
for they both knew the number was 522. Eva said she’d play it when Mr.
Buckland Reed came by. Later she would remember it as the third strange
thing. She had thought it odd even then, but the red in the dream confusedher. But she wasn’t certain that it was third or not because Sula was acting
up, fretting the deweys and meddling the newly married couple. Because
she was thirteen, everybody supposed her nature was coming down, but it
was hard to put up with her sulking and irritation. The birthmark over her
eye was getting darker and looked more and more like a stem and rose. She
was dropping things and eating food that belonged to the newly married
couple and started in to worrying everybody that the deweys needed a bath
and she was going to give it to them. The deweys, who went  wild at the
thought of water , were crying and thundering all over the house like colts.
“We ain’t got to, do we? Do we got to do what she says? It ain’t
Saturday .” They even woke up Tar Baby , who came out of his room to look
at them and then left the house in search of music.
Hannah ignored them and kept on bringing mason jars out of the cellar
and washing them. Eva banged on the floor with her stick but nobody came.
By noon it was quiet. The deweys had escaped, Sula was either in her room
or gone off somewhere. The newly married couple, energized by their
morning lovema king, had gone to look for a day’s work happily  certain that
they would find none.
The air all over the Bottom got heavy with peeled fruit and boiling
vegetables. Fresh corn, tomatoes, string beans, melon rinds. The women,
the children and the old men who had no jobs were putting up for a winter
they understood so well. Peaches were stuffed into jars and black cherries
(later , when it got cooler , they would put up jellies and preserves). The
greedy canned as many as forty-two a day even though some of them, like
Mrs. Jackson, who ate ice, had jars from 1920.
Before she trundled her wagon over to the dresser to get her comb, Eva
looked out the window and saw Hannah bending to light the yard fire. And
that was the fifth (or fourth, if you didn’ t count Sula’ s craziness) strange
thing. She couldn’ t find her comb. Nobody moved stuff in Eva’s room
except to clean and then they put everything right back. But Eva couldn’ t
find it anywhere . One hand pulling her braids loose, the other searching the
dresser drawers, she had just begun to get irritated when she felt it in herblouse drawer . Then she trundled back to the window to catch a breeze, if
one took a mind to come by, while she combed her hair. She rolled up to the
window and it was then she saw Hannah burning. The flames from the yard
fire were licking  the blue cotton  dress, making her dance. Eva knew there
was time for nothing in this world other than the time it took to get there
and cove r her daughter ’s body with her own. She lifted her heavy frame up
on her good leg, and with fists and arms smashed the windowpane. Using
her stump as a support on the window sill, her good leg as a lever , she threw
herself out of the window . Cut and bleeding she clawed the air trying to aim
her body toward the flaming, dancing figure. She missed and came crashing
down some twelve feet from Hannah’ s smoke. Stunned but still conscious,
Eva dragged herself toward her firstborn, but Hannah, her sense s lost, went
flying out of the yard gesturing and bobbing like a sprung jack-in-the-box.
Mr. and Mrs. Suggs, who had set up their canning apparatus in their front
yard, saw her running, dancing toward them. They whispered, “Jesus,
Jesus,” and together hoisted up their tub of water in which tight red
tomatoes floated  and threw it on the smoke-and-flame-bound woman. The
water did put out the flames, but it also made steam, which seared to sealing
all that was left of the beautiful Hannah Peace. She lay there on the wooden
sidewalk planks , twitching lightly among the smashed tomatoes , her face a
mask of agony so intense that for years the people who gathered ’round
would shake their heads at the recollection of it.
Somebody cove red her legs with a shirt. A woman unwrapped her head
rag and placed it on Hannah’ s shoulder . Somebody else ran to Dick’s Fresh
Food and Sundries to call the ambulance. The rest stood there as helpless as
sunflowers leaning on a fence. The deweys came and stepped in the
tomatoes, their eyes raked with wonder . Two cats sidled through  the legs of
the crow d, sniffing the burned flesh. The vomiting of a young girl finally
broke the profound silence and caused the women to talk to each other and
to God. In the midst of calling Jesus they heard the hollow clang of the
ambulance bell struggling up the hill, but not the “Help me, ya’ll” that the
dying woman whispered. Then somebody remembered to go and see about
Eva. They found her on her stomach by the forsythia bushes calling
Hannah’ s name and dragging her body through the sweet peas and cloverthat grew under the forsythia by the side of the house. Mother and daughter
were placed on stretchers and carried to the ambulance. Eva was wide
awake. The blood from her face cuts filled her eyes so she could not see,
could only smell the familiar odor of cooked flesh.
Hannah died on the way to the hospital. Or so they said. In any case, she
had already begun to bubble and blister so badly that the coffin had to be
kept closed at the funeral and the women who washed the body and dressed
it for death wept for her burned hair and wrinkled breasts as though they
themselves had been her lovers.
When Eva got to the hospital they put her stretcher on the floor , so
preoccupied with the hot and bubbling flesh of the other (some of them had
never seen so extreme a burn case before) they forgot Eva, who would have
bled to death except Old Willy Fields, the orderly , saw blood staining his
just-mopped floors and went to find out where it was coming from.
Recognizing Eva at once he shouted to a nurse, who came to see if the
bloody one-legged black woma n was alive or dead. From then on Willy
boasted that he had saved Eva’s life—an indisputable fact which  she herself
admitted and for which she cursed him every day for thirty-seven years
thereafter and would have curse d him for the rest of her life except by then
she was already ninety years old and for got things.
Lying in the colored ward of the hospital, which was a screened corner of
a larger ward, Eva mused over the perfection of the judgment against her.
She remembere d the wedding dream and recalled that weddings always
meant death. And the red gown , well that was the fire, as she should have
known. She remembered something else too, and try as she might to deny
it, she knew that as she lay on the ground trying to drag herself through the
sweet peas and clover to get to Hannah, she had seen Sula standing on the
back porch just looking. When Eva, who was never one to hide the faults of
her children, mentioned what she thought she’d seen to a few friends, they
said it was natural. Sula was probably struck dumb, as anybody would be
who saw her own mamma burn up. Eva said yes, but inside she disagreed
and remained convinced that Sula had watched Hannah burn not because
she was paralyzed, but because she was interested.         
1927
Old people were dancing with little children. Young boys with their sisters,
and the church women who frowned on any bodily expression of joy
(except when the hand of God commanded it) tapped their feet. Somebody
(the groom’s father, everybody said) had poured a whole pint jar of cane
liquor into the punch, so even the men who did not sneak out the back door
to have a shot, as well as the women who let nothing stronger  than Black
Draught enter their blood, were tipsy . A small boy stood at the Victrola
turning its handle and smiling at the sound of Bert Williams’ “Save a Little
Dram for Me.”
Even Helene W right had mellowed with the cane, waving away apologies
for drinks spilled on her rug and paying no attention whatever to the
chocolate cake lying on the arm of her red-velvet sofa. The tea roses above
her left breast had slipped from the brooch that fastened them and were
hanging heads down. When her husband called her attention to the children
wrapping themselves into her curtains, she merely smiled and said, “Oh, let
them be.” She was not only a little drunk, she was weary and had been for
weeks. Her only child’ s wedding—the culmination of all she had been,
thought or done in this world—had dragged from her energy and stamina
even she did not know she possessed. Her house had to be thoroughly
cleaned, chickens had to be plucked, cakes and pies made, and for weeks
she, her friends and her daughter had been sewing. Now it was allhappening and it took only a little cane juice to snap the cords of fatigue
and damn the white curtains that she had pinned on the stretcher only the
morning before. Once this day was over she would have a lifetime to rattle
around in that house and repair the damage.
A real wedding , in a church, with a real reception afterward, was rare
among the people of the Bottom. Expensive for one thing, and most
newlyweds just went to the courthouse if they were not particular , or had
the preacher come in and say a few words if they were. The rest just “took
up” with one another . No invita tions were sent. There was no need for that
formality . Folks just came, bringing a gift if they had one, none if they
didn’ t. Except for those who worked in valley houses, most of them had
never been to a big wedding; they simply assumed it was rather like a
funeral except afterward you didn’ t have to walk all the way out to
Beechnut Cemetery .
This wedding offered a special attraction, for the bridegroom was a
handsome, well-liked man—the tenor of Mount Zion’ s Men’ s Quartet, who
had an enviable reputation among the girls and a comfortable  one among
men. His name was Jude Green e, and with the pick of some eight or ten
girls who came regularly to services to hear him sing, he had chosen Nel
Wright.
He wasn’ t really aiming to get married. He was twenty then, and
although his job as a waiter at the Hotel Medallion was a blessing to his
parents and their seven other children, it wasn’ t nearly enough to support a
wife. He had brought the subjec t up first on the day the word got out that
the town was building a new road, tarmac, that would wind through
Medallion on down to the river, where a great new bridge was to be built to
connect Medalli on to Porter ’s Landing, the town on the other side. The war
over, a fake prosperity was still around. In a state of euphoria, with a hunger
for more and more, the council of founders cast its eye toward a future that
would certainly include trade from cross-river towns. Towns that needed
more than a house raft to get to the merchants of Medallion . Work had
already begun on the New Rive r Road (the city had always meant to nameit something else, something wonderful, but ten years later when the bridge
idea was dropped for a tunnel it was still called the New River Road).
Along with a few other young black men, Jude had gone down to the
shack where they were hiring. Three old colored men had already been
hired, but not for the road work, just to do the picking up, food bringing and
other small errands. These old men were close to feeble, not good for much
else, and everybody was pleased  they were taken on; still it was a shame to
see those white men laughing with the grandfathers but shying  away from
the young black men who could  tear that road up. The men like Jude who
could do real work. Jude himself longed more than anybody  else to be
taken. Not just for the good money, more for the work itself. He wanted to
swing the pick or kneel down with the string or shovel the gravel. His arms
ached for something heavier than trays, for something dirtier than peelings;
his feet wanted the heavy work shoes, not the thin-soled black shoes that
the hotel required. More than anything he wanted the camara derie of the
road men: the lunch buckets, the hollering, the body movemen t that in the
end produced something real, something he could point to. “I built that
road,” he could say. How much better sundown would be than the end of a
day in the restau rant, where a good day’s work was marked by the number
of dirty plates and the weight of the garbage bin. “I built that road.” People
would walk over his sweat for years. Perhaps a sledge hammer would come
crashing down on his foot, and when people asked him how come he
limped, he could say , “Got that building the New Road.”
It was while he was full of such dreams, his body already feeling the
rough work clothes, his hands already curved to the pick handle, that he
spoke to Nel about getting married. She seemed receptive but hardly
anxious. It was after he stood in lines for six days running and saw the gang
boss pick out thin-armed white  boys from the Virginia hills and the bull-
necked Greeks and Italians and heard over and over, “Nothing  else today .
Come back tomorrow ,” that he got the message. So it was rage, rage and a
determination to take on a man’ s role anyhow that made him press Nel
about settling down. He needed some of his appetites filled, some posture
of adulth ood recognized, but mostly he wanted someone to care about his
hurt, to care very deeply . Deep enough to hold him, deep enough to rockhim, deep enough to ask, “How you feel? You all right? Want some
coffee?” And if he were to be a man, that someone could no longer be his
mother . He chose the girl who had always been kind, who had never
seemed hell-ben t to marry , who made the whole venture seem like his idea,
his conquest.
The more he thought about marriage, the more attractive it became.
Whatever his fortune, whatever the cut of his garment, there would always
be the hem—the  tuck and fold that hid his raveling edges; a someone sweet,
industrious and loyal to shore him up. And in return he would shelter her,
love her, grow old with her. Without that someone he was a waiter hanging
around a kitchen like a woman. W ith her he was head of a household pinned
to an unsatisfac tory job out of necessity . The two of them together would
make one Jude.
His fears lest his burst dream of road building discourage her were never
realized. Nel’s indifference to his hints about marriage disappeared
altogether when  she discovered his pain. Jude could see himself taking
shape in her eyes. She actually wanted to help, to soothe, and was it true
what Ajax said in the Time and a Half Pool Hall? That “all they want, man,
is they own misery . Ax em to die for you and they yours for life.”
Whether he was accurate in general, Ajax was right about Nel. Except for
an occasional leadership role with Sula, she had no aggression. Her parents
had succeeded in rubbing down to a dull glow any sparkle or splutter she
had. Only with Sula did that quality have free rein, but their friendship was
so close, they themselves had difficulty distinguishing one’s thoughts from
the other’s. During all of her girlhood the only respite Nel had had from her
stern and undemonstrative parents was Sula. When Jude began to hover
around, she was flattered—all the girls liked him—and Sula made the
enjoyment of his attentions keener simply because she seemed always to
want Nel to shine. They never quarreled, those two, the way some
girlfriends did over boys, or competed against each other for them. In those
days a complime nt to one was a compliment to the other , and cruelty to one
was a challenge to the other .Nel’s response to Jude’ s shame and anger selected her away from Sula.
And greater than her friendship was this new feeling of being needed by
someone who saw her singly . She didn’ t even know she had a neck until
Jude remarked on it, or that her smile was anything but the spreading of her
lips until he saw it as a small miracle.
Sula was no less excited about the wedding. She thought it was the
perfect thing to do following their graduation from general school. She
wanted to be the bridesmaid. No others. And she encouraged Mrs. W right to
go all out, even to borrowing Eva’s punch bowl. In fact, she handled most
of the details very efficiently , capitalizing on the fact that most people were
anxious to please her since she had lost her mamma only a few years back
and they still remembered the agony in Hannah’ s face and the blood on
Eva’s.
         
So they danced up in the Bottom  on the second Saturday in June, danced at
the wedding where everybody realized for the first time that except for their
magnificent teeth, the deweys would never grow . They had been  forty-eight
inches tall for years now, and while their size was unusual  it was not
unheard of. The realization was based on the fact that they remained boys in
mind. Mischievous, cunning, private and completely unhousebroken, their
games and interests had not chan ged since Hannah had them all put into the
first grade together .
Nel and Jude, who had been the stars all during the weddi ng, were
forgotten finally  as the recepti on melted into a dance, a feed, a gossip
session, a playground and a love nest. For the first time that day they
relaxed and looked at each other, and liked what they saw. They began to
dance, pressed in among the others, and each one turned his thoughts to the
night that was coming on fast. They had taken a housekeeping room with
one of Jude’ s aunts (over the protest of Mrs. Wright, who had rooms to
spare, but Nel didn’ t want to make love to her husband in her mother ’s
house) and were getting restless to go there.As if reading her thoughts, Jude leaned down and whispered, “Me too.”
Nel smiled and rested her cheek  on his shoulder . The veil she wore was too
heavy to allow her to feel the core of the kiss he pressed on her head. When
she raised her eyes to him for one more look of reassurance, she saw
through the open door a slim figure in blue, gliding, with just a hint of a
strut, down the path toward the road. One hand was pressed to the head to
hold down the large hat against the warm June breeze. Even from the rear
Nel could tell that it was Sula and that she was smiling; that something deep
down in that litheness was amused. It would be ten years before they saw
each other again, and their meeting would be thick with birds.         
1937
Accompanied by a plague of robins, Sula came back to Medallion. The
little yam-breasted shuddering birds were everywhere, exciting very small
children away from their usual  welcome into a vicious stonin g. Nobody
knew why or from where they had come. What they did know was that you
couldn’ t go anywhere without stepping in their pearly shit, and it was hard
to hang up clothes, pull weeds or just sit on the front porch when robins
were flying and dying all around you.
Although most of the people remembered the time when the sky was
black for two hours with clouds and clouds of pigeons, and although they
were accustome d to excesses in nature—too much heat, too much cold, too
little rain, rain to flooding—the y still dreaded the way a relatively trivial
phenomenon could become sovereign in their lives and bend their minds to
its will.
In spite of their fear, they react ed to an oppressive oddity , or what they
called evil days, with an acceptance that bordered on welcome . Such evil
must be avoided, they felt, and precautions must naturally be taken to
protect themselves from it. But they let it run its course, fulfill itself, and
never invented ways either to alter it, to annihilate it or to prevent its
happening again. So also were they with people.What was taken by outsiders to be slackness, slovenliness or even
generosity was in fact a full recognition of the legitimacy of forces other
than good ones. They did not believe doctors could heal—for them, none
ever had done so. They did not believe death was accidental—life might be,
but death was deliberate. They did not believe Nature was ever askew—
only inconvenie nt. Plague and drought were as “natural” as springtime. If
milk could curdle, God knows robins could fall. The purpose of evil was to
survive it and they determined (without ever knowing they had made up
their minds to do it) to survive floods, white people, tuberculo sis, famine
and ignorance. They knew anger well but not despair , and they didn’ t stone
sinners for the same reason they didn’ t commit suicide—it was beneath
them.
Sula stepped off the Cincinnati Flyer into the robin shit and began the
long climb up into the Bottom. She was dressed in a manner that was as
close to a movie star as anyone would ever see. A black crepe dress
splashed with pink and yellow zinnias, foxtails, a black felt hat with the veil
of net lowered over one eye. In her right hand was a black purse with a
beaded clasp and in her left a red leather traveling case, so small, so
charming—no one had seen anything like it ever before, including the
mayor ’s wife and the music teacher , both of whom had been to Rome.
Walking up the hill toward Carpenter ’s Road, the heels and sides of her
pumps edged with drying bird shit, she attracted the glances of old men
sitting on stone benches in front of the courthouse, housewives throwing
buckets of water on their sidewalks, and high school students on their way
home for lunch. By the time she reached the Bottom, the news of her return
had brought the black people out on their porches or to their windows.
There were scattered hellos and nods but mostly stares. A little boy ran up
to her saying, “Carry yo’ bag, ma’am?” Before Sula could answer his
mother had called him, “Y ou, John. Get back in here.”
At Eva’s house there were four dead robins on the walk. Sula stopped
and with her toe pushed them into the bordering grass.Eva looked at Sula pretty much the same way she had looked at BoyBoy
that time when he returned after he’d left her without a dime or a prospect
of one. She was sitting in her wagon, her back to the window she had
jumped out of (now all boarded  up) setting fire to the hair she had combed
out of her head. When Sula opened the door she raised her eyes and said, “I
might have knowed them birds meant something. Where’ s your coat?”
Sula threw herself on Eva’ s bed. “The rest of my stuf f will be on later .”
“I shoul d hope so. Them little old furry tails ain’t going to do you no
more good than they did the fox that was wearing them.”
“Don’ t you say hello to nobody when you ain’ t seen them for ten years?”
“If folks let somebody know where they is and when they coming, then
other folks can get ready for them. If they don’t—if they just pop in all
sudden like—then they got to take whatever mood they find.”
“How you been doing, Big Mamma?”
“Gettin’ by. Sweet of you to ask. You was quick enough when you
wanted something. When you needed a little change or…”
“Don’ t talk to me about how much you gave me, Big Mamma, and how
much I owe you or none of that.”
“Oh? I ain’ t supposed to mention it?”
“OK. Mention it.” Sula shrugged and turned over on her stomach, her
buttocks toward Eva.
“You ain’t been in this house ten seconds and already you starting
something.”
“Takes two, Big Mamma.”
“Well, don’t let your mouth start nothing that your ass can’t stand. When
you gone to get married? Y ou need to have some babies. It’ll settle you.”“I don’ t want to make somebody else. I want to make myself.”
“Selfish. Ain’t no woman got no business floatin’ around without no
man.”
“You did.”
“Not by choice.”
“Mamma did.”
“Not by choice, I said. It ain’t right for you to want to stay off by
yourself. Y ou need…I’m a tell you what you need.”
Sula sat up. “I need you to shut your mouth.”
“Don’ t nobody talk to me like that. Don’ t nobody…”
“This body does. Just ’cause you was bad enough to cut off your own leg
you think you got a right to kick everybody with the stump.”
“Who said I cut of f my leg?”
“Well, you stuck it under a train to collect insurance.”
“Hold on, you lyin’ heifer!”
“I aim to.”
“Bible say honor thy father and thy mother that thy days may be long
upon the land thy God giveth thee.”
“Mamma must have skipped that part. Her days wasn’ t too long.”
“Pus mouth! God’ s going to strike you!”
“Which God? The one watched you burn Plum?”“Don’ t talk to me about no burning. You watched your own mam ma. You
crazy roach! Y ou the one should have been burnt!”
“But I ain’t. Got that? I ain’t. Any more fires in this house, I’m lighting
them!”
“Hellfire don’ t need lighting and it’ s already burning in you…”
“Whatever ’s burning in me is mine!”
“Amen!”
“And I’ll split this town in two and everything in it before I’ll let you put
it out!”
“Pride goeth before a fall.”
“What the hell do I care about falling?”
“Amazing Grace.”
“You sold your life for twenty-three dollars a month.”
“You throwed yours away .”
“It’s mine to throw .”
“One day you gone need it.”
“But not you. I ain’t never going to need you. And you know what?
Maybe one night when you dozing in that wagon flickin g flies and
swallowing spit, maybe I’ll just tip on up here with some kerosene and—
who knows—you may make the brightest flame of them all.”
So Eva locked her door from then on. But it did no good. In April two
men came with a stretcher and she didn’ t even have time to comb her hair
before they strapped her to a piece of canvas.When Mr. Buck land Reed came by to pick up the number , his mouth
sagged at the sight of Eva being  carried out and Sula holding some papers
against the wall, at the bottom of which, just above the word “guardian,”
she very carefully wrote Miss Sula Mae Peace.
Nel alone notice d the peculiar quality of the May that followed  the leaving
of the birds. It had a sheen, a glimmering as of green, rain-soaked Saturday
nights (lit by the excitement of newly installed street lights); of lemon-
yellow afternoons bright with iced drinks and splashes of daffodils. It
showed in the damp faces of her children and the river-smoothness of their
voices. Even her own body was not immune to the magic. She would sit on
the floor to sew as she had done  as a girl, fold her legs up under her or do a
little dance that fitted some tune in her head. There were easy sun-washed
days and purple dusks in which  Tar Baby sang “Abide With Me” at prayer
meetings, his lashes darkened by tears, his silhouette limp with regret
against the whitewashed walls of Greater Saint Matthew’ s. Nel listened and
was moved to smile. To smile at the sheer loveliness that pressed in from
the windows and touched his grief, making it a pleasure to behold.
Although it was she alone who saw this magic, she did not wonder at it.
She knew it was all due to Sula’ s return to the Bottom. It was like getting
the use of an eye back, having a cataract removed. Her old friend had come
home. Sula. Who made her laugh, who made her see old things with new
eyes, in whose presence she felt clever , gentle and a little raunchy . Sula,
whose past she had lived throug h and with whom the present was a constant
sharing of perceptions. Talking to Sula had always been a conversation with
herself. Was there anyone else before whom she could never be foolish? In
whose view inadequacy was mere idiosyncrasy , a character trait rather than
a deficiency? Anyone who left behind that aura of fun and comp licity? Sula
never competed; she simply helped others define themselves. Other people
seemed to turn their volume on and up when Sula was in the room. Morethan any other thing, humor returned. She could listen to the crunch of
sugar underfoot  that the children had spilled without reaching for the
switch; and she for got the tear in the living-room window shade. Even Nel’ s
love for Jude, which over the years had spun a steady gray web around her
heart, became a bright and easy affection, a playfulness that was reflected in
their lovemaking.
Sula would come by of an afternoon, walking along with her fluid stride,
wearing a plain yellow dress the same way her mother , Hannah, had worn
those too-big house dresses—w ith a distance, an absence of a relationship
to clothes which emphasized everything the fabric covered. When she
scratched the screen door, as in the old days, and stepped inside, the dishes
piled in the sink looked as though they belonged there; the dust on the
lamps sparkled; the hair brush lying on the “good” sofa in the living room
did not have to be apologetically retrieved, and Nel’s grimy intractable
children looked like three wild things happily insouciant in the May shine.
“Hey , girl.” The rose mark over Sula’ s eye gave her glance a suggestion
of startled pleasure. It was darker than Nel remembered.
“Hey yourself. Come on in here.”
“How you doin’?” Sula moved a pile of ironed diapers from a chair and
sat down.
“Oh, I ain’ t strangled nobody yet so I guess I’m all right.”
“Well, if you change your mind call me.”
“Somebody need killin’?”
“Half this town need it.”
“And the other half?”
“A drawn-out disease.”“Oh, come on. Is Medallion that bad?”
“Didn’ t nobody tell you?”
“You been gone too long, Sula.”
“Not too long, but maybe too far .”
“What’ s that supposed to mean? ” Nel dipped her fingers into the bowl of
water and sprinkled a diaper .
“Oh, I don’ t know .”
“Want some cool tea?”
“Mmmm. Lots of ice, I’m burnin’ up.”
“Iceman don’ t come yet, but it’ s good and cold.”
“That’ s fine.”
“Hope I didn’ t speak too soon. Kids run in and out of here so much.” Nel
bent to open the icebox.
“You puttin’ it on, Nel. Jude must be wore out.”
“ Jude  must be wore out? Y ou don’ t care nothin’ ’bout my back, do you?”
“Is that where it’ s at, in your back?”
“Hah! Jude thinks it’ s everywhere.”
“He’ s right, it is everywhere. Just be glad he found it, where ver it is.
Remember John L.?”
“When Shirley said he got her down by the well and tried to stick it in
her hip?” Nel giggled at the remembrance of that teen-time tale. “She
should have been grateful. Have you seen her since you been back?”“Mmm. Like a ox.”
“That was one dumb nigger , John L.”
“Maybe. Maybe he was just sanitary .”
“Sanitary?”
“Well. Think about it. Suppose Shirley was all splayed out in front of
you? W ouldn’ t you go for the hipbone instead?”
Nel lowered her head onto crossed arms while tears of laughter dripped
into the warm diapers. Laughter that weakened her knees and pressed her
bladder into action. Her rapid soprano and Sula’ s dark sleepy chuckle made
a duet that frigh tened the cat and made the children run in from the back
yard, puzzled at first by the wild free sounds, then delighted to see their
mother stumblin g merrily toward the bathroom, holding on to her stomach,
fairly singing through the laugh ter: “Aw. Aw. Lord. Sula. Stop.” And the
other one, the one with the scary black thing over her eye, laughing softly
and egging their mother on: “Neatness counts. You know what cleanliness
is next to…”
“Hush.” Nel’ s plea was clipped of f by the slam of the bathroom door .
“What y’all laughing at?”
“Old time-y stuf f. Long gone, old time-y stuf f.”
“Tell us.”
“Tell you? ” The black mark leaped.
“Uh huh. T ell us.”
“What tickles us wouldn’ t tickle you.”
“Uh huh, it would.”“Well, we was talking about some people we used to know when we was
little.”
“Was my mamma little?”
“Of course.”
“What happened?”
“Well, some old boy we knew name John L. and a girl name…”
Damp-faced, Nel stepped back into the kitchen. She felt new, soft and
new. It had been the longest time since she had had a rib-scraping laugh.
She had forgotten how deep and down it could be. So different from the
miscellaneous giggles and smiles she had learned to be content with these
past few years.
“O Lord, Sula. You haven’ t changed none.” She wiped her eyes. “What
was all that about, anyway? All that scramblin’ we did trying to do it and
not do it at the same time?”
“Beats me. Such a simple thing.”
“But we sure made a lot out of it, and the boys were dumber than we
were.”
“Couldn’ t nobody be dumber than I was.”
“Stop lying. All of ’em liked you best.”
“Yeah? Where are they?”
“They still here. Y ou the one went of f.”
“Didn’ t I, though?”
“Tell me about it. The big city .”“Big is all it is. A big Medallion.”
“No. I mean the life. The nightclubs, and parties…”
“I was in college, Nellie. No nightclubs on campus.”
“Campus? That what they call it? Well. You wasn’ t in no college for—
what—ten years  now? And you didn’ t write to nobody . How come you
never wrote?”
“You never did either .”
“Where was I going to write to? All I knew was that you was in
Nashville. I asked Miss Peace about you once or twice.”
“What did she say?”
“I couldn’ t make much sense out of her. You know she been gettin’
stranger and stranger after she come out the hospital. How is she anyway?”
“Same, I guess. Not so hot.”
“No? Laura, I know , was doing her cooking and things. Is she still?”
“No. I put her out.”
“Put her out? What for?”
“She made me nervous.”
“But she was doing it for nothing, Sula.”
“That’ s what you think. She was stealing right and left.”
“Since when did you get froggy about folks’ stealing?”
Sula smiled. “OK. I lied. Y ou wanted a reason.”“Well, give me the real one.”
“I don’t know the real one. She just didn’ t belong in that house . Digging
around in the cupboards, picking up pots and ice picks…”
“You sure have changed. That house was always full of people digging in
cupboards and carrying on.”
“That’ s the reason, then.”
“Sula. Come on, now .”
“You’ve changed too. I didn’ t used to have to explain everything to you.”
Nel blushed. “Who’ s feeding the deweys and T ar Baby? Y ou?”
“Sure me. Anyway T ar Baby don’ t eat and the deweys still crazy .”
“I heard one of ’em’s mamma came to take him back but didn’ t know
which was hern.”
“Don’ t nobody know .”
“And Eva? Y ou doing the work for her too?”
“Well, since you haven’ t heard it, let me tell you. Eva’s real sick. I had
her put where she could be watched and taken care of.”
“Where would that be?”
“Out by Beechnut.”
“You mean that home the white church run? Sula! That ain’t no place for
Eva. All them women is dirt poor with no people at all. Mrs. Wilkens and
them. They got dropsy and can’t hold their water—crazy as loons. Eva’s
odd, but she got sense. I don’ t think that’ s right, Sula.”
“I’m scared of her , Nellie. That’ s why…”“Scared? Of Eva?”
“You don’ t know her . Did you know she burnt Plum?”
“Oh, I heard that years ago. But nobody put no stock in it.”
“They should have. It’s true. I saw it. And when I got back here she was
planning to do it to me too.”
“Eva? I can’t hardly believe that. She almost died trying to get to your
mother .”
Sula leaned forward, her elbows on the table. “You ever known me to lie
to you?”
“No. But you could be mistaken. Why would Eva…”
“All I know is I’m scared. And there’ s no place else for me to go. We all
that’s left, Eva and me. I guess  I should have stayed gone. I didn’t know
what else to do. Maybe I should have talked to you about it first. You
always had bette r sense than me. Whenever I was scared before , you knew
just what to do.”
The closed place in the water spread before them. Nel put the iron on the
stove. The situation was clear to her now. Sula, like always, was incapable
of making any but the most trivial decisions. When it came to matters of
grave importanc e, she behaved emotionally and irresponsibly and left it to
others to straighten out. And when fear struck her, she did unbelievable
things. Like that time with her finger . Whatever those hunkies did, it
wouldn’ t have been as bad as what she did to herself. But Sula was so
scared she had mutilated herself, to protect herself.
“What should I do, Nellie? Take her back and sleep with my door locked
again?”
“No. I guess it’s too late anyway . But let’s work out a plan for taking care
of her . So she won’ t be messed over .”“Anything you say .”
“What about money? She got any?”
Sula shrugged. “The checks come still. It’s not much, like it used to be.
Should I have them made over to me?”
“Can you? Do it, then. We can arrange for her to have special comforts.
That place is a mess, you know . A doctor don’t never set foot in there. I
ain’t figured out yet how they stay alive in there as long as they do.”
“Why don’t I have the checks made over to you, Nellie? You better at
this than I am.”
“Oh no. People will say I’m scheming. You the one to do it. Was there
insurance from Hannah?”
“Yes. Plum too. He had all that army insurance.”
“Any of it left?”
“Well I went to college on some. Eva banked the rest. I’ll look into it,
though.”
“…and explain it all to the bank people.”
“Will you go down with me?”
“Sure. It’ s going to be all right.”
“I’m glad I talked to you ’bout this. It’ s been bothering me.”
“Well, tongues will wag, but so long as we know the truth, it don’t
matter .”
Just at that moment the children ran in announcing the entrance of their
father . Jude opened the back door and walked into the kitchen. He was stilla very good-loo king man, and the only difference Sula could see was the
thin pencil mustache under his nose, and a part in his hair .
“Hey , Jude. What you know good?”
“White man running it—nothing good.”
Sula laughed while Nel, high-tuned to his moods, ignored her husband’ s
smile saying, “Bad day , honey?”
“Same old stuff,” he replied and told them a brief tale of some personal
insult done him by a customer  and his boss—a whiney tale that peaked
somewhere between anger and a lapping desire for comfort. He ended it
with the observation that a Negr o man had a hard row to hoe in this world.
He expected his story to doveta il into milkwarm commiseration , but before
Nel could excrete it, Sula said she didn’ t know about that—it looked like a
pretty good life to her .
“Say what?” Jude’s temper flared just a bit as he looked at this friend of
his wife’ s, this slight woman, not exactly plain, but not fine either , with a
copperhead over her eye. As far as he could tell, she looked like a woman
roaming the country trying to find some man to burden down with a lot of
lip and a lot of mouths.
Sula was smiling. “I mean, I don’t know what the fuss is about. I mean,
everything in the world loves you. White men love you. They spend so
much time worr ying about your penis they forget their own. The only thing
they want to do is cut off a nigger ’s privates. And if that ain’t love and
respect I don’t know what is. And white women? They chase  you all to
every corner of the earth, feel for you under every bed. I knew a white
woman wouldn’ t leave the house after 6 o’clock for fear one of you would
snatch her. Now ain’t that love? They think rape soon’ s they see you, and if
they don’t get the rape they looking for, they scream it anyway just so the
search won’t be in vain. Colore d women worry themselves into bad health
just tryin g to hang on to your cuffs. Even little children—white  and black,
boys and girls—spend all their childhood eating their hearts out ’cause they
think you don’t love them. And if that ain’t enough, you love yourselves.Nothing in this world loves a black man more than another black man. You
hear of solitary white men, but niggers? Can’ t stay away from one another a
whole day . So. It looks to me like you the envy of the world.”
Jude and Nel were laughing, he saying, “Well, if that’s the only way they
got to show it—cut off my balls  and throw me in jail—I’d just as soon they
left me alone.” But thinking that Sula had an odd way of looki ng at things
and that her wide smile took some of the sting from that rattlesnake over
her eye. A funny  woman, he thought, not that bad-looking. But he could see
why she wasn’ t married; she stirred a man’ s mind maybe, but not his body .
He left his tie. The one with the scriggly yellow lines running lopsided
across the dark-blue field. It hung over the top of the closet door pointing
steadily downward while it waited with every confidence for Jude to return.
Could he be gone if his tie is still here? He will remember it and come
back and then she would…uh. Then she could…tell him. Sit down quietly
and tell him. “But Jude,” she would say, “you knew  me. All those days and
years, Jude, you knew  me. My ways and my hands and how my stomach
folded and how we tried to get Mickey to nurse and how about that time
when the landlo rd said…but you said…and I cried, Jude. You knew me and
had listened to the things I said in the night, and heard me in the bathroom
and laughed at my raggedy girdle and I laughed too because I knew you
too, Jude. So how could you leave me when you knew me?”
         
But they had been down on all fours naked, not touching except their lips
right down there  on the floor where the tie is pointing to, on all fours like
(uh huh, go on, say it) like dogs . Nibbling at each other , not even touching,not even looking at each other , just their lips, and when I open ed the door
they didn’t even  look for a minute and I thought the reason they are not
looking up is because they are not doing that. So it’s all right. I am just
standing here. They are not doing that. I am just standing here and seeing it,
but they are not really doing it. But then they did look up. Or you did. You
did, Jude. And if only you had not looked at me the way the soldiers did on
the train, the way you look at the children when they come in while you are
listening to Gabriel Heatter and break your train of thought—not focusing
exactly but giving them an insta nt, a piece of time, to remember what they
are doing, what they are interru pting, and to go on back to wherever they
were and let you listen to Gabrie l Heatter . And I did not know how to move
my feet or fix my eyes or what. I just stood there seeing it and smiling,
because maybe there was some explanation, something important that I did
not know about that would have  made it all right. I waited for Sula to look
up at me any minute and say one of those lovely college words like
aesthetic  or rapport,  which I never understood but which I loved because
they sounded so comfortable and firm. And finally you just got up and
started putting on your clothes and your privates were hanging down, so
soft, and you buckled your pants belt but forgot to button the fly and she
was sitting on the bed not even bothering to put on her clothes because
actually she didn’ t need to because somehow she didn’ t look naked to me,
only you did. Her chin was in her hand and she sat like a visitor  from out of
town waiting for the hosts to get some quarreling done and over with so the
card game could continue and me wanting her to leave so I could tell you
privately that you had forgotten  to button your fly because I didn’t want to
say it in front of her, Jude. And even when you began to talk, I couldn’ t
hear because I was worried about you not knowing that your fly was open
and scared too because your eyes looked like the soldiers’ that time on the
train when my mother turned to custard.
Remember how big that bedroom was? Jude? How when we moved here
we said, Well, at least we got us a real big bedroom, but it was small then,
Jude, and so shambly , and maybe it was that way all along but it would
have been better  if I had gotten the dust out from under the bed because I
was ashamed of it in that small room. And then you walked past me saying,
“I’ll be back for my things.” And you did but you left your tie.         
The clock was ticking. Nel looked at it and realized that it was two thirty ,
only forty-five minutes before the children would be home and she hadn’ t
even felt anything right or sensible and now there was no time or wouldn’ t
be until nighttime when they were asleep and she could get into bed and
maybe she could do it then. Think. But who could think in that bed where
they had been and where they also had been and where only she was now?
She looked around for a place to be. A small place. The closet?  No. Too
dark. The bathroom. It was both small and bright, and she wanted to be in a
very small, very bright place. Small enough to contain her grief. Bright
enough to throw into relief the dark things that cluttered her. Once inside,
she sank to the tile floor next to the toilet. On her knees, her hand on the
cold rim of the bathtub, she waited for something to happen…inside. There
was stirring, a movement of mud and dead leaves. She thought of the
women at Chicken Little’ s funeral. The women who shrieked over the bier
and at the lip of the open grave. What she had regarde d since as
unbecoming behavior seemed fitting to her now; they were screaming at the
neck of God, his giant nape, the vast back-of-the-head that he had turned on
them in death. But it seemed to her now that it was not a fist-shaking grief
they were keening but rather a simple obligation to say something, do
something, feel something about the dead. They could not let that heart-
smashing event pass unrecorded, unidentified. It was poisonous, unnatural
to let the dead go with a mere whimpering, a slight murmur , a rose bouquet
of good taste. Good taste was out of place in the company of death, death
itself was the essence of bad taste. And there must be much rage and saliva
in its presence. The body must move and throw itself about, the eyes must
roll, the hands should have no peace, and the throat should release all the
yearning, despair and outrage that accompany the stupidity of loss.
“The real hell of Hell is that it is forever .” Sula said that. She said doing
anything forever  and ever was hell. Nel didn’ t understand it then, but now
in the bathroom, trying to feel, she thought, “If I could be sure that I could
stay here in this small white room with the dirty tile and water  gurgling inthe pipes and my head on the cool rim of this bathtub and never have to go
out the door, I would be happy . If I could be certain that I never had to get
up and flush the toilet, go in the kitchen, watch my children grow up and
die, see my food chewed on my plate…Sula was wrong. Hell ain’t things
lasting forever . Hell is change.” Not only did men leave and children grow
up and die, but even the misery didn’ t last. One day she wouldn’ t even have
that. This very grief that had twisted her into a curve on the floor and flayed
her would be gone. She would lose that too.
“Why , even in hate here I am thinking of what Sula said.”
Hunched down in the small bright room Nel waited. Waited for the oldest
cry. A scream not for others, not in sympathy for a burnt child , or a dead
father , but a deeply personal cry for one’s own pain. A loud, strident: “Why
me?” She waited. The mud shifted, the leaves stirred, the smell of overripe
green things enveloped her and announced the beginnings of her very own
howl.
But it did not come.
The odor evaporated; the leaves were still, the mud settled. And finally
there was nothin g, just a flake of something dry and nasty in her throat. She
stood up frightened. There was something just to the right of her, in the air,
just out of view . She could not see it, but she knew exactly what it looked
like. A gray ball hovering just there. Just there. To the right. Quiet, gray,
dirty. A ball of muddy strings, but without weight, fluffy but terrible in its
malevolence. She knew she could not look, so she closed her eyes and crept
past it out of the bathroom, shutting the door behind her. Sweating with
fear, she stepped to the kitchen door and onto the back porch. The lilac
bushes preened at the railing, but there were no lilacs yet. Wasn’t it time?
Surely it was time. She looked over the fence to Mrs. Rayford’ s yard. Hers
were not in bloom either . Was it too late? She fastened on this question with
enthusiasm, all the time aware of something she was not thinking. It was the
only way she could get her mind of f the flake in her throat.She spent a whole summer with the gray ball, the little ball of fur and
string and hair always floating in the light near her but which she did not
see because she never looked. But that was the terrible part, the effort it
took not to look. But it was there anyhow , just to the right of her head and
maybe further down by her shoulder , so when the children  went to a
monster movie at the Elmira Theater and came home and said, “Mamma,
can you sleep with us tonight?” she said all right and got into bed with the
two boys, who loved it, but the girl did not. For a long time she could not
stop getting in the bed with her children and told herself each time that they
might dream a dream about dragons and would need her to comfort them. It
was so nice to think about their scary dreams and not about a ball of fur.
She even hoped their dreams would rub off on her and give her the
wonderful relief  of a nightmare  so she could stop going around scared to
turn her head this way or that lest she see it. That was the scary part—
seeing it. It was not coming at her; it never did that, or tried to pounce on
her. It just floated there for the seeing, if she wanted to, and O my God for
the touching if she wanted to. But she didn’ t want to see it, ever, for if she
saw it, who could tell but what she might actually touch it, or want to, and
then what would  happen if she actually reached out her hand and touched
it? Die probably , but no worse  than that. Dying was OK because it was
sleep and there wasn’ t no gray ball in death, was there? Was there? She
would have to ask somebody about that, somebody she could confide in and
who knew a lot of things, like Sula, for Sula would know or if she didn’ t
she would say something funny that would make it all right. Ooo no, not
Sula. Here she was in the midst of it, hating it, scared of it, and again she
thought of Sula as though they were still friends and talked things over.
That was too much. To lose Jude and not have Sula to talk to about it
because it was Sula that he had left her for .
Now her thighs were really empty . And it was then that what those
women said about never lookin g at another man made some sense to her,
for the real point, the heart of what they said, was the word looked.  Not to
promise never to make love to another man, not to refuse to marry another
man, but to promise and know that she could never afford to look again, to
see and accept the way in which their heads cut the air or see moons and
tree limbs framed by their necks and shoulders…never to look, for now shecould not risk looking—and anyway , so what? For now her thighs were
truly empty and dead too, and it was Sula who had taken the life from them
and Jude who smashed her heart and the both of them who left her with no
thighs and no heart just her brain raveling away .
         
And what am I supposed to do with these old thighs now, just walk up and
down these rooms? What good are they, Jesus? They will never give me the
peace I need to get from sunup to sundown, what good are they, are you
trying to tell me that I am going to have to go all the way through these
days all the way, O my god, to that box with four handles with never
nobody settling down between my legs even if I sew up those  old pillow
cases and rinse down the porch and feed my children and beat the rugs and
haul the coal up out of the bin even then nobody , O Jesus, I could be a mule
or plow the furrows with my hands if need be or hold these rickety walls up
with my back if need be if I knew that somewhere in this world in the
pocket of some night I could open my legs to some cowboy lean hips but
you are trying to tell me no and O my sweet Jesus what kind of cross is
that?         
1939
When the word got out about Eva being put in Sunnydale, the people in the
Bottom shook their heads and said Sula was a roach. Later , when they saw
how she took Jude, then ditched  him for others, and heard how he bought a
bus ticket to Detroit (where he bought but never mailed birthday cards to
his sons), they forgot all about Hannah’ s easy ways (or their own) and said
she was a bitch. Everybody remembered the plague of robins that
announced her return, and the tale about her watching Hanna h burn was
stirred up again.
But it was the men who gave her the final label, who fingerprinted her for
all time. They were the ones who said she was guilty of the unfor givable
thing—the thing for which there was no understanding, no excuse, no
compassion. The route from which there was no way back, the dirt that
could not ever be washed away . They said that Sula slept with white men. It
may not have been true, but it certainly could have been. She was obviously
capable of it. In any case, all minds were closed to her when that word was
passed around. It made the old women draw their lips together; made small
children look away from her in shame; made young men fantasize elaborate
torture for her—just to get the saliva back in their mouths when they saw
her.
Every one of them imagined the scene, each according to his own
predilections—Sula underneath some white man—and it filled them withchoking disgust . There was nothing lower she could do, nothing filthier .
The fact that their own skin color was proof that it had happened in their
own families was no deterrent to their bile. Nor was the willingness of
black men to lie in the beds of white women a consideration that might lead
them toward tolerance. They insisted that all unions between white men and
black women be rape; for a black woman to be willing was literally
unthinkable. In that way, they regarded integration with precisely the same
venom that white people did.
So they laid broomsticks across their doors at night and sprinkled salt on
porch steps. But aside from one or two unsuccessful efforts to collect the
dust from  her footsteps, they did nothing to harm her. As alwa ys the black
people looked at evil stony-eyed and let it run.
Sula acknowledged none of their attempts at counter -conjure or their
gossip and seemed to need the services of nobody . So they watched her far
more closely than they watched any other roach or bitch in the town, and
their alertness was gratified. Things began to happen.
First off, Teapot knocked on her door to see if she had any bottles. He
was the five-year -old son of an indifferent mother , all of whose interests sat
around the door of the Time and a Half Pool Hall. Her name was Betty but
she was called Teapot’ s Mamma because being his mamma was precisely
her majo r failure. When Sula said no, the boy turned around and fell down
the steps. He couldn’ t get up right away and Sula went to help him. His
mother , just then tripping home, saw Sula bending over her son’s pained
face. She flew into a fit of concerned, if drunken, motherhood, and dragged
Teapot home. She told everybody that Sula had pushed him, and talked so
strongly about it she was forced to abide by the advice of her friends and
take him to the county hospital. The two dollars she hated to release turned
out to be well spent, for Teapot did have a fracture, although the doctor said
poor diet had contributed substantially to the daintiness of his bones.
Teapot’ s Mamm a got a lot of attention anyway and immersed herself in a
role she had shown no inclination for: motherhood. The very idea of a
grown woman hurting her boy kept her teeth on edge. She became the most
devoted mother:  sober , clean and industrious. No more nickels for Teapot togo to Dick’ s for a breakfast of Mr. Goodbars and soda pop: no more long
hours of him alone or wande ring the roads while she was otherwise
engaged. Her change was a distinct improvement, although little Teapot did
miss those quiet times at Dick’ s.
Other things happened. Mr. Finley sat on his porch sucking  chicken
bones, as he had done for thirte en years, looked up, saw Sula, choked on a
bone and died on the spot. That incident, and Teapot’ s Mamma, cleared up
for everybody the meaning of the birthmark over her eye; it was not a
stemmed rose, or a snake, it was Hannah’ s ashes marking her from the very
beginning.
She came to their church suppers without underwear , bought their
steaming platte rs of food and merely picked at it—relishing nothing,
exclaiming over no one’s ribs or cobbler . They believed that she was
laughing at their God.
And the fury she created in the women of the town was incredible—for
she would lay their husbands once and then no more. Hannah  had been a
nuisance, but she was complimenting the women, in a way , by wanting their
husbands. Sula was trying them out and discarding them without any
excuse the men could swallow . So the women, to justify their own
judgment, cherished their men more, soothed the pride and vanity Sula had
bruised.
Among the weighty evidence piling up was the fact that Sula did not look
her age. She was near thirty and, unlike them, had lost no teeth, suffered no
bruises, developed no ring of fat at the waist or pocket at the back of her
neck. It was rumored that she had had no childhood diseases, was never
known to have chicken pox, croup or even a runny nose. She had played
rough as a child—where were the scars? Except for a funny-shaped finger
and that evil birthmark, she was free of any normal signs of vulnerability .
Some of the men, who as boys had dated her, remembered that on picnics
neither gnats nor mosquitoes would settle on her. Patsy , Hannah ’s one-time
friend, agreed and said not only that, but she had witnessed the fact that
when Sula drank beer she never belched.The most damni ng evidence, however , came from Dessie, who was a big
Daughter Elk and knew things. At one of the social meetings she revealed
something to her friends.
“Yeh, well I noticed something long time ago. Ain’t said nothing ’bout it
’cause I wasn’ t sure what it meant. Well…I did mention it to Ivy but not
nobody else. I disremember how long ago. ’Bout a month or two I guess
’cause I hadn’ t put down my new linoleum yet. Did you see it, Cora? It’s
that kind we saw in the catalogue.”
“Naw .”
“Get on with it, Dessie.”
“Well, Cora was with me when we looked in the catalogue…”
“We all know ’bout your linoleum. What we don’ t know is…”
“OK. Let me tell it, will you? Just before the linoleum come I was out
front and seed Shadrack carryin’ on as usual…up by the well…walkin’
’round it salutin’ and carryin’ on. You know how he does…hollerin’
commands and…”
“Will you get on with it?”
“Who’ s tellin’ this? Me or you?”
“You.”
“Well, let me tell it then. Like I say, he was just cuttin’ up as usual when
Miss Sula Mae walks by on the other side of the road. And quick as that”—
she snapped her fingers—“he stopped and cut on over ’cros s the road,
steppin’ over to her like a tall turkey in short corn. And guess what? He tips
his hat.”
“Shadrack don’ t wear no hat.”“I know  that but he tipped it anyway . You know what I mean. He acted
like he had a hat and reached up for it and tipped it at her. Now you know
Shadrack ain’ t civil to nobody!”
“Sure ain’ t.”
“Even when you buyin’ his fish he’s cussin’. If you ain’t got the right
change he cussin’ you. If you act like a fish ain’t too fresh he snatch it out
of your hand like he doin’ you the favor .”
“Well, everybody know he a reprobate.”
“Yeh, so how come he tip his hat to Sula? How come he don’ t cuss her?”
“Two devils.”
“Exactly!”
“What’d she do when he tipped it? Smile and give him a curtsey?”
“No, and that was the other thing. It was the first time I see her look
anything but hateful. Like she smellin’ you with her eyes and don’t like
your soap. When he tipped his hat she put her hand on her throat for a
minute and cut out. Went runnin’ on up the road to home. And him still
standin’ there tippin’ away . And—this the point I was comin’ to—when I
went back in the house a big sty come on my eye. And I ain’t never had no
sty before. Never!”
“That’ s ’cause you saw it.”
“Exactly .”
“Devil all right.”
“No two ways about it,” Dessie said, and she popped the rubber  band off
the deck of cards to settle them down for a nice long game of bid whist.         
Their conviction of Sula’ s evil changed them in accountable yet mysterious
ways. Once the source of their personal misfortune was identified, they had
leave to protect and love one another . They began to cherish their husbands
and wives, protect their children, repair their homes and in general band
together against  the devil in their midst. In their world, aberrations were as
much a part of nature as grace. It was not for them to expel or annihilate it.
They would no more run Sula out of town than they would kill the robins
that brought her back, for in their secret awareness of Him, He was not the
God of three faces they sang about. They knew quite well that He had four,
and that the fourth explained Sula. They had lived with various forms of
evil all their days, and it wasn’ t that they believed God would take care of
them. It was rather that they knew God had a brother and that brother hadn’ t
spared God’ s son, so why should he spare them?
There was no creature so ungod ly as to make them destroy it. They could
kill easily if provoked to anger , but not by design, which explained why
they could not “mob kill” anyon e. To do so was not only unna tural, it was
undignified. The presence of evil was something to be first recognized, then
dealt with, survived, outwitted, triumphed over .
Their evidence against Sula was contrived, but their conclusions about
her were  not. Sula was distinct ly different. Eva’s arrogance and Hannah’ s
self-indulgence merged in her and, with a twist that was all her own
imagination, she lived out her days exploring her own thoughts and
emotions, givin g them full rein, feeling no obligation to please anybody
unless their pleasure pleased her. As willing to feel pain as to give pain, to
feel pleasure as to give pleasure, hers was an experimental life—ever since
her mother ’s remarks sent her flying up those stairs, ever since her one
major feeling of responsibility had been exorcised on the bank of a river
with a closed place in the middl e. The first experience taught her there was
no other that you could count on; the second that there was no self to count
on either . She had no center , no speck around which to grow . In the midst of
a pleasant conversation with someone she might say, “Why do you chewwith your mouth open?” not because the answer interested her but because
she wanted to see the person’ s face change rapidly . She was completely free
of ambition, with no affection for money , property or things, no greed, no
desire to command attention or compliments—no ego. For that reason she
felt no compulsion to verify herself—be consistent with herself.
She had clung to Nel as the closest thing to both an other and a self, only
to discover that she and Nel were not one and the same thing. She had no
thought at all of causing Nel pain when she bedded down with Jude. They
had always shared the affection of other people: compared how a boy
kissed, what line he used with one and then the other . Marriage, apparently ,
had changed all that, but having had no intimate knowledge of marriage,
having lived in a house with women who thought all men available, and
selected from among them with a care only for their tastes, she was ill
prepared for the possessiveness of the one person she felt close to. She
knew well enough what other women said and felt, or said they felt. But she
and Nel had always seen through them. They both knew that those women
were not jealous of other wome n; that they were only afraid of losing their
jobs. Afraid their husbands would discover that no uniqueness lay between
their legs.
Nel was the one person who had wanted nothing from her, who had
accepted all aspects of her. Now she wanted everything, and all because of
that. Nel was the first person who had been real to her, whose name she
knew , who had seen as she had the slant of life that made it possible to
stretch it to its limits. Now Nel was one of them.  One of the spiders whose
only thought was the next rung of the web, who dangled in dark dry places
suspended by their own spittle , more terrified of the free fall than the
snake’ s breath below . Their eyes so intent on the wayward stranger who
trips into their net, they were blind to the cobalt on their own backs, the
moonshine fighting to pierce their corners. If they were touched by the
snake’ s breath, however fatal, they were merely victims and knew how to
behave in that role (just as Nel knew how to behave as the wronged wife).
But the free fall, oh no, that required—demanded—invention: a thing to do
with the wings, a way of holding the legs and most of all a full surrender to
the downward flight if they wished to taste their tongues or stay alive. Butalive was what they, and now Nel, did not want to be. Too dangerous. Now
Nel belonged to the town and all of its ways. She had given herself over to
them, and the flick of their tongues would drive her back into her little dry
corner where she would cling to her spittle high above the breath of the
snake and the fall.
It had surprised her a little and saddened her a good deal when Nel
behaved the way the others would have. Nel was one of the reasons she had
drifted back to Medallion, that and the boredom she found in Nashville,
Detroit, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, Macon and San Diego. All
those cities held the same people, working the same mouths, sweating the
same sweat. The men who took her to one or another of those  places had
merged into one large persona lity: the same language of love, the same
entertainments of love, the same cooling of love. Whenever she introduced
her private thoughts into their rubbings or goings, they hooded their eyes.
They taught her nothing but love tricks, shared nothing but worry , gave
nothing but money . She had been looking all along for a friend, and it took
her a while to discover that a lover was not a comrade and could  never be—
for a woman. And that no one would ever be that version of herself which
she sought to reach out to and touch with an ungloved hand. There was only
her own mood and whim, and if that was all there was, she decided to turn
the naked hand toward it, discover it and let others become as intimate with
their own selves as she was.
In a way, her strangeness, her naïveté, her craving for the other half of
her equation was the consequence of an idle imagination. Had she paints, or
clay, or knew the discipline of the dance, or strings; had she anything to
engage her tremendous curiosity  and her gift for metaphor , she might have
exchanged the restlessness and preoccupation with whim for an activity that
provided her with all she yearned for. And like any artist with no art form,
she became dangerous.
She had lied only once in her life—to Nel about the reason for putting
Eva out, and she could lie to her only because she cared abou t her. When
she had come back home, social conversation was impossi ble for her
because she could not lie. She could not say to those old acquaintances,“Hey , girl, you looking good,” when she saw how the years had dusted their
bronze with ash, the eyes that had once opened wide to the moon bent into
grimy sickles of concern. The narrower their lives, the wider their hips.
Those with husbands had folded themselves into starched coffins, their
sides bursting with other people ’s skinned dreams and bony regrets. Those
without men were like sour-tipped needles featuring one constant empty
eye. Those with men had had the sweetness sucked from their breath by
ovens and steam kettles. Their children were like distant but exposed
wounds whose aches were no less intimate because separate  from their
flesh. They had looked at the world and back at their children, back at the
world and back again at their children, and Sula knew that one clear young
eye was all that kept the knife away from the throat’ s curve.
She was pariah, then, and knew it. Knew that they despised her and
believed that they framed their hatred as disgust for the easy way she lay
with men. Whic h was true. She went to bed with men as frequently as she
could. It was the only place where she could find what she was looking for:
misery and the ability to feel deep sorrow . She had not always been aware
that it was sadne ss that she yearned for. Lovemaking seemed to her, at first,
the creation of a special kind of joy. She thought she liked the sootiness of
sex and its comedy; she laughed a great deal during the raucous beginnings,
and rejected those lovers who regarded sex as healthy or beautiful. Sexual
aesthetics bored  her. Although she did not regard sex as ugly (ugliness was
boring also), she liked to think  of it as wicked. But as her experiences
multiplied she realized that not only was it not wicked, it was not necessary
for her to conjure up the idea of wickedness in order to participate fully.
During the lovemaking she found and needed to find the cutting edge.
When she left off cooperating with her body and began to assert herself in
the act, particles  of strength gathered in her like steel shavings drawn to a
spacious magne tic center , forming a tight cluster that nothing, it seemed,
could break. And there was utmost irony and outrage in lying under
someone, in a position of surrender , feeling her own abiding strength and
limitless power . But the cluster did break, fall apart, and in her panic to hold
it togeth er she leaped from the edge into soundlessness and went down
howling, howling in a stinging awareness of the endings of things: an eye of
sorrow in the midst of all that hurricane rage of joy. There, in the center ofthat silence was not eternity but the death of time and a loneliness so
profound the word itself had no meaning. For loneliness assumed the
absence of other people, and the solitude she found in that desperate terrain
had neve r admit ted the possibility of other people. She wept then. Tears for
the deaths of the littlest things : the castaway shoes of child ren; broken
stems of marsh grass battered and drowned by the sea; prom photographs of
dead women she never knew; wedding rings in pawnshop windows; the tidy
bodies of Cornish hens in a nest of rice.
When her partner disengaged himself, she looked up at him in wonder
trying to recall his name; and he looked down at her, smiling with tender
understanding of the state of tearful gratitude to which he believed he had
brought her. She waiting impatiently for him to turn away and settle into a
wet skim of satisfaction and light disgust, leaving her to the postcoital
privateness in which she met herself, welcomed herself, and joined herself
in matchless harmony .
At twen ty-nine she knew it would be no other way for her, but she had
not coun ted on the footsteps on the porch, and the beautiful black face that
stared at her through the blue-glass window . Ajax.
Looking for all the world as he had seventeen years ago when he had
called her pig meat. He was twenty-one then, she twelve. A universe of
time between them. Now she was twenty-nine, he thirty-eig ht, and the
lemon-yellow haunches seemed not so far away after all.
She opened the heavy door and saw him standing on the other side of the
screen door with two quarts of milk tucked into his arms like marble
statues. He smiled and said, “I been lookin’ all over for you.”
“Why?” she asked.
“To give you these,” and he nodded toward one of the quarts of milk.
“I don’ t like milk,” she said.
“But you like bottles don’ t you?” He held one up. “Ain’ t that pretty?”And indeed it was. Hanging from  his fingers, framed by a slick blue sky,
it looked precious and clean and permanent. She had the distinct impression
that he had done something dangerous to get them.
Sula ran her fingernails over the screen thoughtfully for a second and
then, laughing, she opened the screen door .
Ajax came in and headed straight for the kitchen. Sula followed slowly .
By the time she got to the door he had undone the complicated wire cap and
was letting the cold milk run into his mouth.
Sula watched him—or rather the rhythm in his throat—with growing
interest. When he had had enou gh, he poured the rest into the sink, rinsed
the bottle out and presented it to her. She took the bottle with one hand and
his wrist with the other and pulled him into the pantry . There was no need
to go there, for not a soul was in the house, but the gesture came to
Hannah’ s daughter naturally . There in the pantry , empty now of flour sacks,
void of row upon row of canned  goods, free forever of strings of tiny green
peppers, holding the wet milk bottle tight in her arm she stood wide-legged
against the wall and pulled from his track-lean hips all the pleasure her
thighs could hold.
         
He came regularly then, bearing  gifts: clusters of black berries still on their
branches, four meal-fried porgies wrapped in a salmon-colored sheet of the
Pittsbur gh Courier , a handful of jacks, two boxes of lime Jell-W ell, a hunk
of ice-w agon ice, a can of Old Dutch Cleanser with the bonneted woman
chasing dirt with her stick; a page of Tillie the Toiler comics, and more
gleaming white bottles of milk.
Contrary to what anybody would have suspected from just seeing him
lounging around the pool hall, or shooting at Mr. Finley for beating his own
dog, or calling filthy complimen ts to passing women, Ajax was very nice to
women. His women, of course, knew it, and it provoked them into
murderous battles over him in the streets, brawling thick-thighed womenwith knives disturbed many a Friday night with their blood letting and
attracted whooping crowds. On such occasions Ajax stood, along with the
crowd, and viewed the fighters with the same golden-eyed indifference with
which he watched old men playing checkers. Other than his mother , who sat
in her shack with six younger sons working roots, he had never met an
interesting woman in his life.
His kindness to them in general was not due to a ritual of seduction (he
had no need for it) but rather to the habit he acquired in dealing with his
mother , who inspired thoughtfulness and generosity in all her sons.
She was an evil conjure woman, blessed with seven adoring children
whose joy it was to bring her the plants, hair, underclothing , fingernail
parings, white hens, blood, camphor, pictures, kerosene and footstep dust
that she needed , as well as to order Van Van, High John the Conqueror ,
Little John to Chew, Devil’ s Shoe String, Chinese Wash, Musta rd Seed and
the Nine  Herbs from Cincinnati. She knew about the weather , omens, the
living, the dead, dreams and all illnesses and made a modest living with her
skills. Had she any teeth or ever straightened her back, she would have been
the most gorgeous thing alive, worthy of her sons’ worship for her beauty
alone, if not for the absolute freedom she allowed them (known in some
quarters as neglect) and the weight of her hoary knowledge.
This woman Ajax loved, and after her—airplanes. There was nothing in
between. And when he was not sitting enchanted listening to his mother ’s
words, he thoug ht of airplanes, and pilots, and the deep sky that held them
both. People thought that those long trips he took to large cities  in the state
were for some sophisticated good times they could not imagine but only
envy; actually he was leaning against the barbed wire of airport s, or nosing
around hangars just to hear the talk of the men who were fortun ate enough
to be in the trade. The rest of the time, the time he was not watching his
mother ’s magic or thinking of airplanes, he spent in the idle pursuits of
bachelors witho ut work in smal l towns. He had heard all the stories about
Sula, and they aroused his curiosity . Her elusiveness and indifference to
established habits of behavior reminded him of his mother , who was as
stubborn in her pursuits of the occult as the women of Greater SaintMatthew’ s were in the search for redeeming grace. So when his curiosity
was high enough he picked two bottles of milk off the porch of some white
family and went to see her, suspecting that this was perhaps the only other
woman he knew whose life was her own, who could deal with life
efficiently , and who was not interested in nailing him.
Sula, too, was curious. She knew nothing about him except the word he
had called out to her years ago and the feeling he had excited in her then.
She had grown quite accustome d to the clichés of other people’ s lives as
well as her own increasing dissa tisfaction with Medallion. If she could have
thought of a place to go, she probably would have left, but that was before
Ajax looked at her through the blue glass and held the milk aloft like a
trophy .
But it was not the presents that made her wrap him up in her thighs. They
were charming, of course (espec ially the jar of butterflies he let loose in the
bedroom), but her real pleasure was the fact that he talked to her. They had
genuine convers ations. He did not speak down to her or at her, nor content
himself with puerile questions about her life or monologues of his own
activities. Think ing she was possibly brilliant, like his mother , he seemed to
expect brilliance from her, and she delivered. And in all of it, he listened
more than he spoke. His clear comfort at being in her presence, his lazy
willingness to tell her all about fixes and the powers of plants, his refusal to
baby or protect her, his assumption that she was both tough and wise—all
of that coupled with a wide generosity of spirit only occasionally erupting
into vengeance sustained Sula’ s interest and enthusiasm.
His idea of bliss (on earth as opposed to bliss in the sky) was a long bath
in pipin g-hot water—his head on the cool white rim, his eyes closed in
reverie.
“Soaking in hot water give you a bad back.” Sula stood in the doorway
looking at his knees glistening just at the surface of the soap-gray water .
“Soaking in Sula give me a bad back.”
“Worth it?”“Don’ t know yet. Go ’way .”
“Airplanes?”
“Airplanes.”
“Lindber gh know about you?”
“Go ’way .”
She went and waited for him in Eva’s high bed, her head turned to the
boarded-up window. She was smiling, thinking how like Jude’ s was his
craving to do the white man’ s work, when two deweys came in with their
beautiful teeth and said, “W e sick.”
Sula turned her head slowly and murmured, “Get well.”
“We need some medicine.”
“Look in the bathroom.”
“Ajax in there.”
“Then wait.”
“We sick now .”
Sula leaned over the bed, picked up a shoe and threw it at them.
“Cocksucker!” they screamed, and she leaped out of the bed naked as a
yard dog. She caught the redheaded dewey by his shirt and held him by the
heels over the banister until he wet his pants. The other dewey was joined
by the third, and they delved into their pockets for stones, which  they threw
at her. Sula, ducking and tottering with laughter , carried the wet dewey to
the bedroom and when the other two followed her, deprived of all weapons
except their teeth, Sula had dropped the first dewey on the bed and was
fishing in her purse. She gave each of them a dollar bill which theysnatched and then scooted off down the stairs to Dick’ s to buy the catarrh
remedy they loved to drink.
Ajax came sopping wet into the room and lay down on the bed to let the
air dry him. They were both still for a long time until he reached out and
touched her arm.
He liked for her to mount him so he could see her towering above him
and call soft obscenities up into her face. As she rocked there, swayed there,
like a Geor gia pine on its knees, high above the slipping, falling  smile, high
above the golden eyes and the velvet helmet of hair, rocking, swaying, she
focused her thoughts to bar the creeping disorder that was flooding her hips.
She looked down, down from what seemed an awful height at the head of
the man whose lemon-yellow  gabardines had been the first sexual
excitement she’d  known. Letting her thoughts dwell on his face in order to
confine, for just a while longer , the drift of her flesh toward the high silence
of or gasm.
If I take a chamois and rub real hard on the bone, right on the ledge of
your cheek bone, some of the black will disappear . It will flake away into
the cham ois and underneath there will be gold leaf. I can see it shining
through the black. I know it is ther e…
How high she was over his wand-lean body , how slippery was his sliding
sliding smile.
And if I take a nail file or even Eva’s old paring knife—that will do—and
scrape away at the gold, it will fall away and there will be alabaster . The
alabaster is what gives your face its planes, its curves. That is why your
mouth smiling does not reach your eyes. Alabaster is giving it a gravity that
resists a total smile.
The height and the swaying dizzied her, so she bent down and let her
breasts graze his chest.
Then I can take a chisel and small tap hammer and tap away at the
alabaster . It will crack then like ice under the pick, and through the breaks Iwill see the loam, fertile, free of pebbles and twigs. For it is the loam that is
giving you that smell.
She slipped her hands under his armpits, for it seemed as though she
would not be able to dam the spread of weakness she felt under her skin
without holding on to something.
I will put my hand deep into your soil, lift it, sift it with my fingers, feel its
warm surface and dewy chill below .
She put her head under his chin with no hope in the world of keeping
anything at all at bay .
I will water your soil, keep it rich and moist. But how much? How much
water to keep the loam moist? And how much loam will I need  to keep my
water still? And when do the two make mud?
He swallowed her mouth just as her thighs had swallowed his genitals,
and the house was very , very quiet.
Sula began to discover what possession was. Not love, perhaps, but
possession or at least the desire  for it. She was astounded by so new and
alien a feeling. First there was the morning of the night before when she
actually wonder ed if Ajax would come by that day. Then there was an
afternoon when she stood before the mirror finger -tracing the laugh lines
around her mouth and trying to decide whether she was good-looking or
not. She ended this deep perusa l by tying a green ribbon in her hair. The
green silk made a rippling whis per as she slid it into her hair—a whisper
that could easily  have been Hannah’ s chuckle, a soft slow nasal hiss she
used to emit when something amused her. Like women sitting for two hours
under the marce lling irons only to wonder two days later how soon theywould need another appointment. The ribbon-tying was followed by other
activity , and when Ajax came that evening, bringing her a reed whistle he
had carved that morning, not only was the green ribbon still in her hair, but
the bathroom was gleaming, the bed was made, and the table was set for
two.
He gave her the reed whistle, unlaced his shoes and sat in the rocking
chair in the kitchen.
Sula walked toward him and kissed his mouth. He ran his fingers along
the nape of her neck.
“I bet you ain’ t even missed T ar Baby , have you?” he asked.
“Missed? No. Where is he?”
Ajax smiled at her delicious indif ference. “Jail.”
“Since when?”
“Last Saturday .”
“Picked up for drunk?”
“Little bit more than that,” he answered and went ahead to tell her about
his own involvement in another of T ar Baby’ s misfortunes.
On Saturday afternoon Tar Baby had stumbled drunk into traffic on the
New River Road. A woman driver swerved to avoid him and hit another
car. When the police came, they recognized the woman as the mayor ’s niece
and arrested Tar Baby . Later , after the word got out, Ajax and two other
men went to the station to see about him. At first they wouldn’ t let them in.
But they relented after Ajax and the other two just stood around for one
hour and a half and repeated their request at regular intervals. When they
finally got perm ission to go in and looked in at him in the cell, he was
twisted up in a corner badly beaten and dressed in nothing but extremely
soiled underwear . Ajax and the other men asked the officer why Tar Babycouldn’ t have back his clothes.  “It ain’t right,” they said, “to let a grown
man lay around in his own shit.”
The policeman, obviously in agreement with Eva, who had always
maintained that Tar Baby was white, said that if the prisoner didn’ t like to
live in shit, he should come down out of those hills, and live like a decent
white man.
More words were exchanged, hot words and dark, and the whole thing
ended with the arraignment of the three black men, and an appointment to
appear in civil court Thursday next.
Ajax didn’ t seem too bother ed by any of it. More annoyed and
inconvenienced than anything else. He had had several messes with the
police, mostly in gambling raids, and regarded them as the natural hazards
of Negro life.
But Sula, the green ribbon shining in her hair, was flooded with an
awareness of the impact of the outside world on Ajax. She stood up and
arranged herself  on the arm of the rocking chair . Putting her fingers deep
into the velvet of his hair , she murmured, “Come on. Lean on me.”
Ajax blinked. Then he looked swiftly into her face. In her words, in her
voice, was a sound he knew well. For the first time he saw the green ribbon.
He looked around and saw the gleaming kitchen and the table set for two
and detected the scent of the nest. Every hackle on his body rose, and he
knew that very soon she would,  like all of her sisters before her, put to him
the death-knell question “Where  you been?” His eyes dimmed with a mild
and momentary regret.
He stood and mounted the stairs with her and entered the spotless
bathroom where the dust had been swept from underneath the claw-foot
tub. He was trying to remember the date of the air show in Dayton. As he
came into the bedroom, he saw Sula lying on fresh white sheets, wrapped in
the deadly odor of freshly applied cologne.He dragged her under him and made love to her with the steadiness and
the intensity of a man about to leave for Dayton.
         
Every now and then she looked around for tangible evidence of his having
ever been there. Where were the butterflies? the blueberries? the whistling
reed? She could find nothing, for he had left nothing but his stunning
absence. An absence so decorative, so ornate, it was difficult for her to
understand how she had ever endured, without falling dead or being
consumed, his magnificent presence.
The mirror by the door was not a mirror by the door , it was an altar where
he stood for only a moment to put on his cap before going out. The red
rocking chair was a rocking of his own hips as he sat in the kitchen. Still,
there was nothing of his—his own—that she could find. It was as if she
were afraid she had hallucinated  him and needed proof to the contrary . His
absence was everywhere, stinging everything, giving the furnishings
primary colors, sharp outlines to the corners of rooms and gold light to the
dust collecting on table tops. When he was there he pulled everything
toward himself. Not only her eyes and all her senses but also inanimate
things seemed to exist because of him, backdrops to his presenc e. Now that
he had gone, these things, so long subdued by his presence, were
glamorized in his wake.
Then one day, burrowing in a dresser drawer , she found what she had
been looking for: proof that he had been there, his driver ’s license. It
contained just what she needed for verification—his vital statistics: Born
1901, height 5'11'', weight 152 lbs., eyes brown, hair black, color black. Oh
yes, skin black. Very black. So black that only a steady careful rubbing with
steel wool would remove it, and as it was removed there was the glint of
gold leaf and under the gold leaf the cold alabaster and deep, deep down
under the cold alabaster more black only this time the black of warm loam.
But what was this? Albert Jacks? His name was Albert Jacks? A. Jacks.
She had thought it was Ajax. All those years. Even from the time shewalked by the pool hall and looked away from him sitting astride a wooden
chair , looked away to keep from seeing the wide space of intolerable
orderliness betw een his legs; the openness that held no sign, no sign at all,
of the animal that lurked in his trousers; looked away from the insolent
nostrils and the smile that kept slipping and falling, falling, falling so she
wanted to reach out with her hand to catch it before it fell to the pavement
and was sullied by the cigarette  butts and bottle caps and spittle at his feet
and the feet of other men who sat or stood around outside the pool hall,
calling, singing out to her and Nel and grown women too with lyrics like
pig meat  and brown sugar  and jailbait  and O Lord, what have I done to
deserve the wrath,  and Take me, Jesus, I have seen the promised land,  and
Do, Lord, remember me in voices mellowed by hope less passion into
gentleness. Even  then, when she and Nel were trying hard not to dream of
him and not to think of him when they touched the softn ess in their
underwear or undid their braids  as soon as they left home to let the hair
bump and wave around their ears, or wrapped the cotton binding around
their chests so the nipples would not break through their blouses and give
him cause to smile his slipping, falling smile, which brough t the blood
rushing to their skin. And even later, when for the first time in her life she
had lain in bed with a man and said his name involuntarily or said it truly
meaning him, the name she was screaming and saying was not his at all.
Sula stood with a worn slip of paper in her fingers and said aloud to no
one, “I didn’ t even know his name. And if I didn’ t know his name, then
there is nothing I did know and I have known nothing ever at all since the
one thing I wanted was to know  his name so how could he help but leave
me since he was making love to a woman who didn’ t even know his name.
“When I was a little girl the heads of my paper dolls came off, and it was
a long time before I discovered that my own head would not fall of f if I bent
my neck. I used to walk aroun d holding it very stiff because I thought a
strong wind or a heavy push would snap my neck. Nel was the one who told
me the truth. But she was wrong . I did not hold my head stiff enough when
I met him and so I lost it just like the dolls.“It’s just as well he left. Soon I would have torn the flesh from his face
just to see if I was right about the gold and nobody would have  understood
that kind of curiosity . They would have believed that I wanted to hurt him
just like the little boy who fell down the steps and broke his leg and the
people think I pushed him just because I looked at it.”
Holding the driver ’s license she crawled into bed and fell into a sleep full
of dreams of cobalt blue.
When she awok e, there was a melody in her head she could not identify
or recall ever hearing before. “Perhaps I made it up,” she thought. Then it
came to her—the name of the song and all its lyrics just as she had heard it
many times before. She sat on the edge of the bed thinking, “There aren’ t
any more new songs and I have sung all the ones there are. I have sung
them all. I have sung all the songs there are.” She lay down again on the
bed and sang a little wandering tune made up of the words I have sung all
the songs all the songs I have sung all the songs there are until, touched by
her own lullaby , she grew drows y, and in the hollow of near-sleep she tasted
the acridness of gold, left the chill of alabaster and smelled the dark, sweet
stench of loam.         
1940
“I heard you was sick. Anything I can do for you?”
She had practice d not just the words but the tone, the pitch of her voice.
It should be calm, matter -of-fact, but strong in sympathy—fo r the illness
though, not for the patient.
The sound of her voice as she heard it in her head betrayed no curiosity ,
no pride , just the inflection of any good woman come to see about a sick
person who, incidentally , had such visits from nobody else.
For the first time in three years she would be looking at the stemmed rose
that hung over the eye of her enemy. Moreover , she would be doing it with
the taste of Jude’s exit in her mouth, with the resentment and shame that
even yet pressed for release in her stomach. She would be facin g the black
rose that Jude had kissed and looking at the nostrils of the woman who had
twisted her love for her own children into something so thick and
monstrous she was afraid to show it lest it break loose and smother them
with its heavy paw. A cumbersome bear-love that, given any rein, would
suck their breath away in its crying need for honey .
Because Jude’ s leaving was so complete, the full responsibility of the
household was Nel’s. There were no more fifty dollars in brown envelopes
to count  on, so she took to cleaning rather than fret away the tiny seaman’ spension her parents lived on. And just this past year she got a better job
working as a chambermaid in the same hotel Jude had worked in. The tips
were only fair, but the hours were good—she was home when the children
got out of school.
At thirty  her hot brown eyes had turned to agate, and her skin had taken
on the sheen of maple struck down, split and sanded at the height of its
green. Virtue, bleak and drawn, was her only mooring. It brought her to
Number 7 Carpenter ’s Road and the door with the blue glass; it helped her
to resist scratching the screen as in days gone by; it hid from her the true
motives for her charity , and, finally , it gave her voice the timbre  she wanted
it to have: free of delight or a lip-smacking “I told you so” with which the
news of Sula’ s illness had been received up in the Bottom—free  of the least
hint of retribution.
Now she stood in Eva’s old bedroom, looking down at that dark rose,
aware of the knife-thin arms sliding back and forth over the quilt and the
boarded-up window Eva had jumped out of.
Sula looked up and without a second’ s pause followed Nel’s example of
leaving out the greeting when she spoke.
“As a matter of fact, there is. I got a prescription. Nathan usually goes for
me but he…school don’t let out till three. Could you run it over to the
drugstore?”
“Where is it?” Nel was glad to have a concrete errand. Conversation
would be difficult. (Trust Sula to pick up a relationship exactly where it
lay.)
“Look in my bag. No. Over there.”
Nel walked to the dresser and opened the purse with the beaded clasp.
She saw only a watch and the folded prescription down inside. No wallet,
no change purse. She turned to Sula: “Where’ s your…”But Sula was looking at the boarded-up window . Something in her eye
right there in the corner stopped Nel from completing her question. That
and the slight flare of the nostrils—a shadow of a snarl. Nel took the piece
of paper and picked up her own purse, saying, “OK. I’ll be right back.”
As soon  as the door was shut, Sula breathed through her mouth. While
Nel was in the room the pain had increased. Now that this new pain killer ,
the one she had been holding in reserve, was on the way her misery was
manageable. She let a piece of her mind lay on Nel. It was funny , sending
Nel off to that drugstore right away like that, after she had not seen her to
speak to for years. The drugstore was where Edna Finch’ s Mellow House
used to be years  back when they were girls. Where they used to go, the two
of them,  hand in hand, for the 18-cent ice-cream sundaes, past the Time and
a Half Pool Hall, where the sprawling men said “pig meat,” and they sat in
that cool room with the marble-top tables and ate the first ice-cream
sundaes of their lives. Now Nel was going back there alone and Sula was
waiting for the medicine the doctor said not to take until the pain got really
bad. And she supposed “really bad” was now. Although you could never
tell. She wonde red for an instan t what Nellie wanted; why she had come.
Did she want to gloat? Make up? Following this line of thought required
more concentration than she could muster . Pain was greedy; it demanded all
of her attention. But it was good that this new medicine, the reserve, would
be brought to her by her old friend. Nel, she remembered, always thrived on
a crisis. The closed place in the water; Hannah’ s funeral. Nel was the best.
When Sula imitated her , or tried to, those long years ago, it always ended up
in some action noteworthy not for its coolness but mostly for its being
bizarre. The one time she tried to protect Nel, she had cut of f her own finger
tip and earned not Nel’s gratitud e but her disgust. From then on she had let
her emotions dictate her behavior .
She could hear Nel’s footsteps long before she opened the door and put
the medicine on the table near the bed.
As Sula poured the liquid into a sticky spoon, Nel began the sickroom
conversation.“You look fine, Sula.”
“You lying, Nellie. I look bad.” She gulped the medicine.
“No. I haven’ t seen you for a long time, but you look…”
“You don’ t have to do that, Nellie. It’ s going to be all right.”
“What ails you? Have they said?”
Sula licked the corners of her lips. “Y ou want to talk about that?”
Nel smiled, sligh tly, at the blunt ness she had forgotten. “No. No, I don’t,
but you sure you should be staying up here alone?”
“Nathan comes by . The deweys sometimes, and T ar Baby…”
“That ain’t help, Sula. You need  to be with somebody grown. Somebody
who can…”
“I’d rather be here, Nellie.”
“You know you don’ t have to be proud with me.”
“Proud?” Sula’ s laughter broke through the phlegm. “What you talking
about? I like my own dirt, Nellie. I’m not proud. You sure have forgotten
me.”
“Maybe. Maybe not. But you a woman and you alone.”
“And you? Ain’ t you alone?”
“I’m not sick. I work.”
“Yes. Of course you do. Work’s good for you, Nellie. It don’t do nothing
for me.”
“You never had to.”“I never would.”
“There’ s someth ing to say for it, Sula. ’Specially if you don’t want
people to have to do for you.”
“Neither one, Nellie. Neither one.”
“You can’t have it all, Sula.”  Nel was getting exasperated with her
arrogance, with her lying at death’ s door still smart-talking.
“Why? I can do it all, why can’ t I have it all?”
“You can’ t do it all. You a woman and a colored woman at that. You can’t
act like a man. You can’t be walking around all independent -like, doing
whatever you like, taking what you want, leaving what you don’ t.”
“You repeating yourself.”
“How repeating myself?”
“You say I’m a woman and colored. Ain’ t that the same as being a man?”
“I don’ t think so and you wouldn’ t either if you had children.”
“Then I really would act like what you call a man. Every man I ever
knew left his children.”
“Some were taken.”
“Wrong, Nellie. The word is ‘left.’”
“You still going to know everything, ain’ t you?”
“I don’ t know everything, I just do everything.”
“Well, you don’ t do what I do.”“You think I don’t know what your life is like just because I ain’t living
it? I know what every colored woman in this country is doing.”
“What’ s that?”
“Dying. Just like me. But the difference is they dying like a stump. Me,
I’m going down like one of those redwoods. I sure did live in this world.”
“Really? What have you got to show for it?”
“Show? To who? Girl, I got my mind. And what goes on in it. Which is
to say , I got me.”
“Lonely , ain’ t it?”
“Yes. But my lonely is mine.  Now your lonely is somebody else’s. Made
by some body else and handed to you. Ain’t that something? A secondhand
lonely .”
Nel sat back on the little wood en chair . Anger skipped but she realized
that Sula was probably just showing off. No telling what shape she was
really in, but there was no point  in saying anything other than what was the
truth. “I always understood how you could take a man. Now I understand
why you can’ t keep none.”
“Is that what I’m supposed to do? Spend my life keeping a man?”
“They worth keeping, Sula.”
“They ain’t worth more than me. And besides, I never loved  no man
because he was worth it. W orth didn’ t have nothing to do with it.”
“What did?”
“My mind did. That’ s all.”
“Well I guess that’s it. You own the world and the rest of us is renting.
You ride the pony and we shovel the shit. I didn’ t come up here for this kindof talk, Sula…”
“No?”
“No. I come to see about you. But now that you opened it up, I may as
well close it.” Nel’s fingers closed around the brass rail of the bed. Now she
would ask her . “How come you did it, Sula?”
There was a silence but Nel felt no obligation to fill it.
Sula stirred a little under the covers. She looked bored as she sucked her
teeth. “Well, there was this space in front of me, behind me, in my head.
Some space. And Jude filled it up. That’ s all. He just filled up the space.”
“You mean you didn’ t even love him?” The feel of the brass was in Nel’s
mouth. “It wasn’ t even loving him?”
Sula looked toward the boarded -up window again. Her eyes fluttered as
if she were about to fall of f into sleep.
“But…” Nel held her stomach in. “But what about me? What about me?
Why didn’t you think about me? Didn’ t I count? I never hurt you. What did
you take him for if you didn’ t love him and why didn’ t you think about
me?” And then, “I was good to you, Sula, why don’ t that matter?”
Sula turned her head away from the boarded window . Her voice was
quiet and the stemmed rose over her eye was very dark. “It matters, Nel, but
only to you. Not to anybody else. Being good to somebody is just like being
mean to somebody . Risky . You don’ t get nothing for it.”
Nel took her hands from the brass railing. She was annoyed with herself.
Finally when she had gotten the nerve to ask the question, the right
question, it made no difference . Sula couldn’ t give her a sensible answer
because she didn’ t know . Would be, in fact, the last to know . Talking to her
about right and wrong was like talking to the deweys. She picked at the
fringe on Sula’ s bedspread and said softly , “We were friends.”“Oh, yes. Good friends,” Sula said.
“And you didn’ t love me enough to leave him alone. To let him love me.
You had to take him away .”
“What you mean take him away? I didn’ t kill him, I just fucked him. If
we were such good friends, how come you couldn’ t get over it?”
“You laying there in that bed without a dime or a friend to your name
having done all the dirt you did in this town and you still expect folks to
love you?”
Sula raised herself up on her elbows. Her face glistened with the dew of
fever . She opened her mouth as though to say something, then fell back on
the pillows and sighed. “Oh, they’ll love me all right. It will take time, but
they’ll love me.” The sound of her voice was as soft and distant as the look
in her eyes. “After all the old women have lain with the teen-agers; when all
the young girls have slept with their old drunken uncles; after all the black
men fuck all the white ones; when all the white women kiss all the black
ones; when the guards have raped all the jailbirds and after all the whores
make love to their grannies; after all the faggots get their mothers’ trim;
when Lindber gh sleeps with Bessie Smith and Norma Shearer makes it with
Stepin Fetchit; after all the dogs have fucked all the cats and every
weathervane on every barn flies off the roof to mount the hogs…then
there’ll be a little love left over for me. And I know just what it will feel
like.”
She closed her eyes then and thought of the wind pressing her dress
between her legs as she ran up the bank of the river to four leaf-locked trees
and the digging of holes in the earth.
Embarrassed, irritable and a little bit ashamed, Nel rose to go. “Goodbye,
Sula. I don’ t reckon I’ll be back.”
She opened the door and heard Sula’ s low whisper . “Hey , girl.” Nel
paused and turned her head but not enough to see her .“How you know?” Sula asked.
“Know what?” Nel still wouldn’ t look at her .
“About who was good. How you know it was you?”
“What you mean?”
“I mean maybe it wasn’ t you. Maybe it was me.”
Nel took two steps out the door and closed it behind her. She walked
down the hall and down the four flights of steps. The house billowed
around her light then dark, full of presences without sounds. The deweys,
Tar Baby, the newly married couples, Mr. Buckland Reed, Patsy , Valentine,
and the beautiful Hannah Peace. Where were they? Eva out at the old folks’
home, the deweys living anywhere, Tar Baby steeped in wine, and Sula
upstairs in Eva’s bed with a boarded-up window and an empty pocketbook
on the dresser .
When Nel closed the door, Sula reached for more medicine . Then she
turned the pillow  over to its cool side and thought about her old friend. “So
she will walk on down that road, her back so straight in that old green coat,
the strap of her handbag pushed back all the way to the elbow , thinking how
much I have cost her and never remember the days when we were two
throats and one eye and we had no price.”
Pictures drifted through her head as lightly as dandelion spores : the blue
eagle that swall owed the E of the Sherman’ s Mellowe wine that Tar Baby
drank; the pink underlid of Hannah’s eye as she probed for a fleck of coal
dust or a lash. She thought of looking out of the windows of all those trains
and buses, looking at the feet and backs of all those people. Nothing wasever different. They were all the same. All of the words and all of the
smiles, every tear and every gag just something to do.
“That’ s the same sun I looked at when I was twelve, the same pear trees.
If I live a hundr ed years my urine will flow the same way, my armpits and
breath will smell the same. My hair will grow from the same holes. I didn’ t
mean anything. I never meant anything. I stood there watching her burn and
was thrilled. I wanted her to keep on jerking like that, to keep on dancing.”
Then she had the dream again. The Clabber Girl Baking Powder lady was
smiling and beckoning to her, one hand under her apron. When Sula came
near she disintegrated into white dust, which Sula was hurried ly trying to
stuff into the pockets of her blue-flannel housecoat. The disintegration was
awful to see, but worse was the feel of the powder—its starchy slipperiness
as she tried to collect it by handfuls. The more she scooped, the more it
billowed. At last it covered her, filled her eyes, her nose, her throat, and she
woke gagging and overwhelmed with the smell of smoke.
Pain took hold. First a fluttering as of doves in her stomach, then a kind
of burning, followed by a spread of thin wires to other parts of her body .
Once the wires of liquid pain were in place, they jelled and began to throb.
She tried concentrating on the throbs, identifying them as waves, hammer
strokes, razor edges or small explosions. Soon even the variety  of the pain
bored her and there was nothing  to do, for it was joined by fatigue so great
she could not make a fist or fight the taste of oil at the back of her tongue.
Several times she tried to cry out, but the fatigue barely let her open her
lips, let alone take the deep breath necessary to scream. So she lay there
wondering how soon she would gather enough strength to lift her arm and
push the rough quilt away from  her chin and whether she should turn her
cheek to the cooler side of the pillow now or wait till her face was
thoroughly soaked and the move would be more refreshing. But she was
reluctant to move her face for another reason. If she turned her head, she
would not be able to see the boarded-up window Eva jumped out of. And
looking at those four wooden planks with the steel rod slanting across them
was the only peace she had. The sealed window soothed her with its sturdytermination, its unassailable finality . It was as though for the first time she
was completely alone—where she had always wanted to be— free of the
possibility of distraction. It would be here, only here, held by this blind
window high above the elm tree, that she might draw her legs up to her
chest, close her eyes, put her thumb in her mouth and float over and down
the tunnels, just missing the dark walls, down, down until she met a rain
scent and would know the water was near, and she would curl into its heavy
softness and it would envelop  her, carry her, and wash her tired flesh
always. Always. Who said that? She tried hard to think. Who was it that had
promised her a sleep of water always? The effort to recall was too great; it
loosened a knot in her chest that turned her thoughts again to the pain.
While in this state of weary anticipation, she noticed that she was not
breathing, that her heart had stopped completely . A crease of fear touched
her breast, for any second there was sure to be a violent explosion in her
brain, a gasping  for breath. Then she realized, or rather she sensed, that
there was not going to be any pain. She was not breathing because she
didn’ t have to. Her body did not need oxygen. She was dead.
Sula felt her face smiling. “Well, I’ll be damned,” she thought, “it didn’ t
even hurt. W ait’ll I tell Nel.”         
1941
The death of Sula Peace was the best news folks up in the Bottom had had
since the promise of work at the tunnel. Of the few who were not afraid to
witness the burial of a witch and who had gone to the cemeter y, some had
come just to verify her being put away but stayed to sing “Shall We Gather
at the River” for politeness’ sake, quite unaware of the bleak promise of
their song. Othe rs came to see that nothing went awry , that the shallow-
minded and small-hearted kept their meanness at bay, and that the entire
event be characterized by that abiding gentleness of spirit to which they
themselves had arrived by the simple determination not to let anything—
anything at all: not failed crops, not rednecks, lost jobs, sick children, rotten
potatoes, broken pipes, bug-ridden flour , third-class coal, educated social
workers, thievin g insurance men, garlic-ridden hunkies, corrupt Catholics,
racist Protestants, cowardly Jews, slaveholding Moslems, jackleg nigger
preachers, squeamish Chinamen, cholera, dropsy or the Black  Plague, let
alone a strange woman—keep them from their God.
In any case, both the raw-spirited and the gentle who came—not to the
white funeral parlor but to the colored part of the Beechnut Cemetery—felt
that either because  Sula was dead or just after  she was dead a brighter day
was dawning. There were signs. The rumor that the tunnel spanning the
river would use Negro workers became an announcement. Planned,
abandoned and replanned for years, this project had finally begun in 1937.For three years there were rumors that blacks would work it, and hope was
high in spite of the fact that the River Road leading to the tunnel had
encouraged similar hopes in 1927 but had ended up being built entirely by
white labor—hillbillies and immigrants taking even the lowest jobs. But the
tunnel itself was another matte r. The craft work—no, they would not get
that. But it was a major job, and the government seemed to favor opening
up empl oyment to black workers. It meant black men would not have to
sweep Medallion to eat, or leave the town altogether for the steel mills in
Akron and along Lake Erie.
The second sign was the const ruction begun on an old people’ s home.
True, it was more renovation than construction, but the blacks were free, or
so it was said, to occupy it. Some said that the very transfer of Eva from the
ramshackle house that passed for a colored women’ s nursing home to the
bright new one was a clear sign of the mystery of God’ s ways, His mighty
thumb having been seen at Sula’ s throat.
So it was with a strong sense of hope that the people in the Bottom
watched October close.
         
Then Medallion  turned silver . It seemed sudden, but actually there had been
days and days of no snow—just frost—when, late one afternoon, a rain fell
and froze. Way down Carpenter ’s Road, where the concrete sidewalks
started, children hurried to the sliding places before shopkeepers and old
women sprinkled stove ashes, like ancient onyx, onto the new-minted silver .
They hugged trees simply to hold for a moment all that life and largeness
stilled in glass, and gazed at the sun pressed against the gray sky like a
worn doubloon, wondering all the while if the world were coming to an
end. Grass stood blade by blade, shocked into separateness by an ice that
held for days.
Late-harvesting things were ruined, of course, and fowl died of both chill
and rage. Cider  turned to ice and split the jugs, forcing the men to drink
their cane liquor  too soon. It was better down in the valley , since, as always,the hills protected it, but up in the Bottom black folks suffered heavily in
their thin houses  and thinner clothes. The ice-cold wind bled what little heat
they had through windowpanes and ill-fitting doors. For days on end they
were virtually housebound, venturing out only to coal bins or right next
door for the trading of vital foodstuf fs. Never to the stores. No deliveries
were being made anyway , and when they were, the items were saved for
better -paying white customers. Women could not make it down the icy
slopes and therefore missed days of wages they sorely needed.
The consequenc e of all that ice was a wretched Thanksgivin g of tiny
tough birds, heavy pork cakes, and pithy sweet potatoes. By the time the ice
began to melt and the first barge was seen shuddering through the ice skim
on the river, everybody under fifteen had croup, or scarlet fever , and those
over had chilblains, rheumatism , pleurisy , earaches and a world of other
ailments.
Still it was not those illnesses or even the ice that marked the beginning
of the trouble, that self-fulfilled prophecy that Shadrack carried on his
tongue. As soon as the silvering began, long before the cider cracked the
jugs, there was something wrong. A falling away , a dislocation  was taking
place. Hard on the heels of the general relief that Sula’ s death brought a
restless irritabili ty took hold. Teapot, for example, went into the kitchen and
asked his mother for some sugar -butter -bread. She got up to fix it and found
that she had no butter , only oleomar garine. Too tired to mix the saffron-
colored powder into the hard cake of oleo, she simply smeared the white
stuff on the bread and sprinkled the sugar over it. Teapot tasted the
difference and refused to eat it. This keenest of insults that a mother can
feel, the rejection by a child of her food, bent her into fury and she beat him
as she had not done since Sula knocked him down the steps. She was not
alone. Other mothers who had defended their children from Sula’ s
malevolence (or who had defended their positions as mothers from Sula’ s
scorn for the role) now had nothing to rub up against. The tension was gone
and so was the reason for the effort they had made. Without her mockery ,
affection for others sank into flaccid disrepair . Daughters who had
complained bitterly about the responsibilities of taking care of their aged
mothers-in-law had altered when Sula locked Eva away , and they begancleaning those old women’ s spittoons without a murmur . Now that Sula was
dead and done with, they returned to a steeping resentment of the burdens
of old people. Wives uncoddled their husbands; there seemed no further
need to reinforce their vanity . And even those Negroes who had moved
down from Canada to Medallion , who remarked every chance they got that
they had never been slaves, felt a loosening of the reactionary compassion
for Southern-born blacks Sula had inspired in them. They retur ned to their
original claims of superiority .
The normal meanness that the winter brought was compounded by the
small-spiritedness that hunger and scarlet fever produced. Even a definite
and witnessed interview of four colored men (and the promise  of more in
the spring) at the tunnel site could not break the cold vise of that lean and
bitter year ’s end.
Christmas came one morning and haggled everybody’ s nerves like a dull
ax—too shabby to cut clean but too heavy to ignore. The children lay wall-
eyed on creaking beds or palle ts near the stove, sucking peppermint and
oranges in between coughs while their mothers stomped the floors in rage at
the cakes that did not rise because the stove fire had been so stingy; at the
curled bodies of men who chose to sleep the day away rather than face the
silence made by the absence of Lionel trains, drums, crybab y dolls and
rocking horses. Teen-agers sneaked into the Elmira Theater in the afternoon
and let Tex Ritter free them from the recollection of their fathers’ shoes,
yawning in impotence under the bed. Some of them had a bottle of wine,
which they drank at the feet of the glittering Mr. Ritter , making such a
ruckus the manager had to put them out. The white people who came with
Christmas bags of rock candy and old clothes were hard put to get a Yes’m,
thank you,  out of those sullen mouths.
Just as the ice lingered in Octo ber, so did the phlegm of December—
which explained the enormous relief brought on by the first three days of
1941. It was as though the season had exhausted itself, for on January first
the temperature  shot up to sixty-one degrees and slushed the whiteness
overnight. On January second drab patches of grass could be seen in thefields. On Janua ry third the sun came out—and so did Shadra ck with his
rope, his bell and his childish dir ge.
         
He had spent the night before watching a tiny moon. The people , the voices
that kept him company , were with him less and less. Now there were long
periods when he heard nothing except the wind in the trees and the plop of
buckeyes on the earth. In the winter , when the fish were too hard to get to,
he did picking-u p jobs for small businessmen (nobody would have him in
or even near their homes), and thereby continued to have enough money for
liquor . Yet the drunk times were becoming deeper but more seldom. It was
as though he no longer needed to drink to forget whatever it was he could
not remember . Now he could not remember that he had ever forgotten
anything. Perha ps that was why for the first time after that cold day in
France he was beginning to miss the presence of other people. Shadrack had
improved enoug h to feel lonely . If he was lonely before, he didn’ t know it
because the noise he kept up, the roaring, the busyness, protected him from
knowing it. Now the compulsion to activity , to filling up the time when he
was not happily fishing on the riverbank, had dwindled. He sometimes fell
asleep before he got drunk; sometimes spent whole days looking at the river
and the sky; and more and more he relinquished the military habits of
cleanliness in his shack. Once a bird flew into his door—one of the robins
during the time there was a plague of them. It stayed, looking for an exit,
for the better part of an hour. When the bird found the window and flew
away , Shadrack was grieved and actually waited and watched for its return.
During those days of waiting, he did not make his bed, or sweep, or shake
out the little rag-braid rug, and almost forgot to slash with his fish knife the
passing day on his calendar . When he did return to housekeeping , it was not
with the precision he had always insisted upon. The messier his house got,
the lonelier he felt, and it was harder and harder to conjure up sergeants,
and orderlies, and invading armies; harder and harder to hear the gunfire
and keep  the platoon marching in time. More frequently now he looked at
and fondled the one piece of evidence that he once had a visitor in his
house: a child’ s purple-and-wh ite belt. The one the little girl left behindwhen she came to see him. Shad rack remembered the scene clearly . He had
stepped into the door and there was a tear-stained face turning, turning
toward him; eyes hurt and wondering; mouth parted in an effort to ask a
question. She had wanted something—from him. Not fish, not work, but
something only he could give. She had a tadpole over her eye (that was how
he knew she was a friend—she had the mark of the fish he loved), and one
of her braids had come undone. But when he looked at her face he had seen
also the skull beneath, and thinking she saw it too—knew it was there and
was afraid—he tried to think of something to say to comfort her, something
to stop the hurt from spilling out of her eyes. So he had said “always,” so
she would not have to be afraid of the change—the falling away  of skin, the
drip and slide of blood, and the exposure of bone underneath. He had said
“always” to convince her , assure her , of permanency .
It worked, for when he said it her face lit up and the hurt did leave. She
ran then, carrying his knowledg e, but her belt fell off and he kept it as a
memento. It hung on a nail near his bed—unfrayed, unsullied after all those
years, with only the permanent bend in the fabric made by its long life on a
nail. It was pleasant living with that sign of a visitor , his only one. And after
a while he was able to connect the belt with the face, the tadpole-over -the-
eye-face that he sometimes saw up in the Bottom. His visitor , his company ,
his guest, his social life, his wom an, his daughter , his friend—they all hung
there on a nail near his bed.
Now he stared at the tiny moon  floating high over the ice-cho ked river.
His loneliness had dropped down somewhere around his ankles. Some other
feeling possessed him. A feeling that touched his eyes and made him blink.
He had seen her again months? weeks? ago. Raking leaves for Mr. Hodges,
he had gone into the cellar for two bushel baskets to put them in. In the
hallway he passed an open door leading to a small room. She lay on a table
there. It was surely the same one. The same little-girl face, same tadpole
over the eye. So he had been wrong. Terribly wrong. No “alw ays” at all.
Another dying away of someone whose face he knew .
It was then he began to suspect that all those years of rope hauling and
bell ringing were never going to do any good. He might as well sit foreveron his riverbank and stare out of the window at the moon.
By his day-slashed calendar he knew that tomorrow was the day. And for
the first time he did not want to go. He wanted to stay with the purple-and-
white belt. Not go. Not go.
Still, when the day broke in an incredible splash of sun, he gathered his
things. In the early part of the afternoon, drenched in sunlight  and certain
that this would be the last time he would invite them to end their lives
neatly and sweetly , he walked over the rickety bridge and on into the
Bottom. But it was not heartfel t this time, not loving this time, for he no
longer cared whether he helped them or not. His rope was impr operly tied;
his bell had a tinny unimpassio ned sound. His visitor was dead  and would
come no more.
         
Years later people would quarrel about who had been the first to go. Most
folks said it was the deweys, but one or two knew better , knew that Dessie
and Ivy had been first. Said that Dessie had opened her door first and stood
there shielding her eyes from the sun while watching Shadrack coming
down the road. She laughed.
Maybe the sun; maybe the clots of green showing in the hills promising
so much; maybe the contrast between Shadrack’ s doomy , gloomy bell
glinting in all that sweet sunshine. Maybe just a brief moment, for once, of
not feeling fear, of looking at death in the sunshine and being unafraid. She
laughed.
Upstairs, Ivy heard her and looked to see what caused the thick music
that rocked her neighbor ’s breasts. Then Ivy laughed too. Like the scarlet
fever that had touched everybody and worn them down to gristle, their
laughter infected Carpenter ’s Road. Soon children were jumping about
giggling and men came to the porches to chuckle. By the time Shadrack
reached the first house, he was facing a line of delighted faces.Never before had they laughed. Always they had shut their doors, pulled
down the shades and called their children out of the road. It frightened him,
this glee, but he stuck to his habit—singing his song, ringing his bell and
holding fast to his rope. The deweys with their magnificent teeth ran out
from Number 7 and danced a little jig around the befuddled Shadrack, then
cut into a wild aping of his walk, his song and his bell-ringin g. By now
women were holding their stomachs, and the men were slapping their
knees. It was Mrs. Jackson, who ate ice, who tripped down off her porch
and marched—actually marched—along behind him. The scene was so
comic the people walked into the road to make sure they saw it all. In that
way the parade started.
Everybody , Dessie, Tar Baby , Patsy , Mr. Buckland Reed, Teapot’ s
Mamma, Valent ine, the deweys, Mrs. Jackson, Irene, the proprietor of the
Palace of Cosmetology , Reba, the Herrod brothers and flocks of teen-agers
got into the mood and, laughing, dancing, calling to one another , formed a
pied piper’s band behind Shadrack. As the initial group of about twenty
people passed more houses, they called to the people standing in doors and
leaning out of windows to join them; to help them open further this slit in
the veil, this respite from anxiety, from dignity , from gravity , from the
weight of that very adult pain that had under girded them all those years
before. Called to them to come out and play in the sunshine—as though the
sunshine would last, as though there really was hope. The same hope that
kept them picking beans for other farmers; kept them from finally leaving
as they talked of doing; kept them knee-deep in other people’ s dirt; kept
them excited about other people’ s wars; kept them solicitous of white
people’ s children; kept them convinced that some magic “government” was
going to lift them up, out and away from that dirt, those beans, those wars.
Some, of course, like Helene Wright, would not go. She watched the
ruckus with characteristic scorn . Others, who understood the Spirit’ s touch
which made them dance, who understood whole families bending their
backs in a field while singing as from one throat, who understood the
ecstasy of river baptisms under  suns just like this one, did not understand
this curious disorder , this headless display and so refused also to go.Nevertheless, the sun splashed on a larger and larger crowd that strutted,
skipped, marched, and shuffled down the road. When they got down to
where the sidew alk started, some of them stopped and decided to turn back,
too embarrassed  to enter the white part of town whooping like banshees.
But except for three or four, the fainthearted were put to shame by the more
aggressive and abandoned, and the parade danced down Main Street past
Woolworth’ s and the old poultry house, turned right and move d on down
the New River Road.
At the mouth of the tunnel excavation, in a fever pitch of excitement and
joy, they saw the timber , the bricks, the steel ribs and the tacky wire gate
that glittered under ice struck to diamond in the sun. It dazzled them, at
first, and they were suddenly quiet. Their hooded eyes swept over the place
where their hope had lain since 1927. There was the promise: leaf-dead.
The teeth unrepaired, the coal credit cut off, the chest pains unattended, the
school shoes unbought, the rush-stuf fed mattresses, the broken  toilets, the
leaning porches, the slurred remarks and the staggering childish
malevolence of their employer s. All there in blazing sunlit ice rapidly
becoming water .
Like antelopes they leaped over the little gate—a wire barricade that was
never intended to bar anything but dogs, rabbits and stray children—and led
by the tough, the enraged and the young they picked up the lengths of
timber and thin steel ribs and smashed the bricks they would never fire in
yawning kilns, split the sacks of limestone they had not mixed or even been
allowed to haul; tore the wire mesh, tipped over wheelbarrow s and rolled
forepoles down the bank, where they sailed far out on the icebound river .
Old and young, women and children, lame and hearty , they killed, as best
they could, the tunnel they were forbidden to build.
They didn’t mean to go in, to actually go down into the lip of the tunnel,
but in their need to kill it all, all of it, to wipe from the face of the earth the
work of the thin-armed Virginia boys, the bull-necked Greeks and the knife-
faced men who waved the leaf-dead promise, they went too deep, too far…A lot of them died there. The earth, now warm, shifted; the first forepole
slipped; loose rock fell from the face of the tunnel and caused a shield to
give way . They found themselves in a chamber of water , deprived of the sun
that had brought them there. With the first crack and whoosh of water , the
clamber to get out was so fierce that others who were trying to help were
pulled to their deaths. Pressed up against steel ribs and timber blocks young
boys strangled when the oxygen left them to join the water . Outside, others
watched in terror as ice split and earth shook beneath their feet. Mrs.
Jackson, weighi ng less than 100 pounds, slid down the bank and met with
an open  mouth the ice she had craved all her life. Tar Baby , Dessie, Ivy,
Valentine, the Herrod boys, some of Ajax’ s younger brothers and the
deweys (at least it was supposed; their bodies were never found)—all died
there. Mr. Buckland Reed escaped, so did Patsy and her two boys, as well
as some fifteen or twenty who had not gotten close enough to fall, or whose
timidity would not let them enter an unfinished tunnel.
And all the while Shadrack stood there. Having forgotten his song and
his rope, he just stood there high up on the bank ringing, ringing his bell.         
1965
Things were so much better in 1965. Or so it seemed. You could go
downtown and see colored people working in the dime store  behind the
counters, even handling money with cash-register keys around their necks.
And a colored man taught mathematics at the junior high school. The young
people had a look about them that everybody said was new but which
reminded Nel of the deweys, whom nobody had ever found. Maybe, she
thought, they had gone off and seeded the land and growed up in these
young people in the dime store with the cash-register keys around their
necks.
They were so different, these young people. So different from the way
she remembered them forty years ago.
         
Jesus, there were some beautiful boys in 1921! Look like the whole world
was bursting at the seams with them. Thirteen, fourteen, fiftee n years old.
Jesus, they were fine. L. P., Paul Freeman and his brother Jake, Mrs. Scott’ s
twins—and Ajax had a whole flock of younger brothers. They hung out of
attic windows, rode on car fenders, delivered the coal, moved into
Medallion and moved out, visited cousins, plowed, hoisted, lounged on the
church steps, careened on the school playground. The sun heate d them andthe moon slid down their backs. God, the world was full of beautiful boys in
1921.
Nothing like these kids. Everyth ing had changed. Even the whores were
better then: tough, fat, laughing women with burns on their cheeks and wit
married to their meanness: or widows couched in small houses in the woods
with eight children to feed and no man. These modern-day whores were
pale and dull before those women. These little clothes-crazy things were
always embarrassed. Nasty but shamed. They didn’ t know what shameless
was. They should have known those silvery widows in the woods who
would get up from the dinner table and walk into the trees with a customer
with as much embarrassment as a calving mare.
Lord, how time flies. She hardly recognized anybody in the town any
more. Now there was another old people’ s home. Look like this town just
kept on building  homes for old people. Every time they built a road they
built a old folks ’ home. You’d think folks was living longer , but the fact of
it was, they was just being put out faster .
Nel hadn ’t seen the insides of this most recent one yet, but it was her turn
in Circle Number 5 to visit some  of the old women there. The pastor visited
them regularly , but the circle thought private visits were nice too. There
were just nine colored women out there, the same nine that had been in the
other one. But a lot of white ones. White people didn’ t fret about putting
their old ones away . It took a lot for black people to let them go, and even if
somebody was old and alone, others did the dropping by, the floor washing,
the cooking. Only when they got crazy and unmanageable were  they let go.
Unless it was somebody like Sula, who put Eva away out of meanness. It
was true that Eva was foolish in the head, but not so bad as to need locking
up.
Nel was more than a little curious to see her. She had been really active
in church only a year or less, and that was because the children were grown
now and took up less time and less space in her mind. For over twenty-five
years since Jude walked out she had pinned herself into a tiny life. She
spent a little time trying to marry again, but nobody wanted to take her onwith three children, and she simply couldn’ t manage the business of
keeping boyfrien ds. During the war she had had a rather long relationship
with a sergeant stationed at the camp twenty miles down river from
Medallion, but then he got called away and everything was reduced to a few
letters—then nothing. Then there was a bartender at the hotel. But now she
was fifty-five and hard put to remember what all that had been about.
It didn’t take long, after Jude left, for her to see what the future would be.
She had looked at her children and knew in her heart that that would be all.
That they were all she would ever know of love. But it was a love that, like
a pan of syrup kept too long on the stove, had cooked out, leaving only its
odor and a hard, sweet sludge, impossible to scrape off. For the mouths of
her child ren quickly forgot the taste of her nipples, and years ago they had
begun to look past her face into the nearest stretch of sky .
In the meantime  the Bottom had collapsed. Everybody who had made
money during the war moved as close as they could to the valley , and the
white people were buying down river, cross river, stretching Medallion like
two strings on the banks. Nobody colored lived much up in the Bottom any
more. White people were build ing towers for television stations up there
and there was a rumor about a golf course or something. Anyway , hill land
was more valuab le now, and those black people who had moved  down right
after the war and in the fifties couldn’ t afford to come back even if they
wanted to. Except for the few blacks still huddled by the river bend, and
some undemolis hed houses on Carpenter ’s Road, only rich white folks were
building homes in the hills. Just like that, they had changed their minds and
instead of keepin g the valley floor to themselves, now they wanted a hilltop
house with a river view and a ring of elms. The black people, for all their
new look, seem ed awfully anxious to get to the valley , or leave town, and
abandon the hills to whoever was interested. It was sad, because the Bottom
had been a real place. These young ones kept talking about the community ,
but they left the hills to the poor, the old, the stubborn—and the rich white
folks. Maybe it hadn’ t been a community , but it had been a place. Now
there weren’ t any places left, just separate houses with separate televisions
and separate telephones and less and less dropping by .These were the same thoughts she always had when she walk ed down
into the town. One of the last true pedestrians, Nel walked the shoulder road
while cars slipped by. Laughed at by her children, she still walked wherever
she wanted to go, allowing herself to accept rides only when the weather
required it.
Now she went straight through the town and turned left at its farthest end,
along a tree-line d walk that turned into a country road farther on and passed
the cemetery , Beechnut Park.
When she got to Sunnydale, the home for the aged, it was already four
o’clock and turning chill. She would be glad to sit down with those old
birds and rest her feet.
A red-ha ired lady at the desk gave her a pass card and pointed to a door
that opened onto a corridor of smaller doors. It looked like what she
imagined a college dormitory to be. The lobby was luxurious—modern—
but the rooms she peeped into were sterile green cages. There was too much
light everywhere; it needed some shadows. The third door, down the hall,
had a little name tag over it that read EVA PEACE . Nel twisted the knob
and rapped a little on the door at the same time, then listened a moment
before she opened it.
At first she couldn’ t believe it. She seemed so small, sitting at that table
in a black-vinyl chair . All the heaviness had gone and the heigh t. Her once
beautiful leg had no stocking and the foot was in a slipper . Nel wanted to
cry—not for Eva’s milk-dull eyes or her floppy lips, but for the once proud
foot accustomed  for over a half century to a fine well-laced shoe, now
stuffed gracelessly into a pink terrycloth slipper .
“Good evening, Miss Peace. I’m Nel Greene come to pay a call on you.
You remember me, don’ t you?”
Eva was ironing and dreaming of stairwells. She had neither  iron nor
clothes but did not stop her fastidious lining up of pleats or pressing out of
wrinkles even when she acknowledged Nel’ s greeting.“Howdy . Sit down.”
“Thank you.” Nel sat on the edge of the little bed.
“You’ve got a pretty room, a real pretty room, Miss Peace.”
“You eat something funny today?”
“Ma’am?”
“Some chop suey? Think back.”
“No, ma’am.”
“No? W ell, you gone be sick later on.”
“But I didn’ t have no chop suey .”
“You think I come all the way over here for you to tell me that? I can’t
make visits too often. Y ou should have some respect for old people.”
“But Miss Peace, I’m visiting you. This is your room.” Nel smiled.
“What you say your name was?”
“Nel Greene.”
“Wiley W right’ s girl?”
“Uh huh. You do remember . That makes me feel good, Miss Peace. You
remember me and my father .”
“Tell me how you killed that little boy .”
“What? What little boy?”
“The one you threw in the water . I got oranges. How did you get him to
go in the water?”“I didn’ t throw no little boy in the river . That was Sula.”
“You. Sula. What’ s the difference? You was there. You watched, didn’ t
you? Me, I never would’ve watched.”
“You’re confused, Miss Peace. I’m Nel. Sula’ s dead.”
“It’s awful cold in the water . Fire is warm. How did you get him in?” Eva
wet her forefinger and tested the iron’ s heat.
“Who told you all these lies? Miss Peace? Who told you? Why are you
telling lies on me?”
“I got oranges. I don’t drink they old orange juice. They puts something
in it.”
“Why are you trying to make out like I did it?”
Eva stopped ironing and looked  at Nel. For the first time her eyes looked
sane.
“You think I’m guilty?” Nel was whispering.
Eva whispered back, “Who would know that better than you?”
“I want to know  who you been talking to.” Nel forced herself to speak
normally .
“Plum. Sweet Plum. He tells me things.” Eva laughed a light, tinkly
giggle—girlish.
“I’ll be going now , Miss Peace.” Nel stood.
“You ain’ t answered me yet.”
“I don’ t know what you’re talking about.”“Just alike. Both of you. Neve r was no difference between you. Want
some oranges? It’ s better for you than chop suey . Sula? I got oranges.”
Nel walked hurriedly down the hall, Eva calling after her, “Sula?” Nel
couldn’ t see the other women today . That woman had upset her. She handed
her pass back to the lady , avoiding her look of surprise.
Outside she fastened her coat against the rising wind. The top button was
missing so she covered her throat with her hand. A bright space opened in
her head and memory seeped into it.
Standing on the riverbank in a purple-and-white dress, Sula swinging
Chicken Little around and aroun d. His laughter before the hand-slip and the
water closing quickly over the place. What had she felt then, watching Sula
going around and around and then the little boy swinging out over the
water? Sula had cried and cried when she came back from  Shadrack’ s
house. But Nel had remained calm.
“Shouldn’ t we tell?”
“Did he see?”
“I don’ t know . No.”
“Let’ s go. W e can’ t bring him back.”
What did old Eva mean by you watched?  How  could she help seeing it?
She was right there. But Eva didn’ t say see, she said watched.  “I did not
watch it. I just saw it.” But it was there anyway , as it had always been, the
old feeling and the old question. The good feeling she had had when
Chicken’ s hands  slipped. She hadn’ t wondered about that in years. “Why
didn’ t I feel bad when it happened? How come it felt so good to see him
fall?”
All these years she had been secretly proud of her calm, controlled
behavior when Sula was uncontrollable, her compassion for Sula’ s
frightened and shamed eyes. Now it seemed that what she had thought wasmaturity , serenity and compassi on was only the tranquillity that follows a
joyful stimulation. Just as the water closed peacefully over the turbulence of
Chicken Little’ s body , so had contentment washed over her enjoyment.
She was walking too fast. Not watching where she placed her feet, she
got into the weeds by the side of the road. Running almost, she approached
Beechnut Park. Just over there was the colored part of the cemetery . She
went in. Sula was buried there along with Plum, Hannah and now Pearl.
With the same disregard for name changes by marriage that the black
people of Medallion always showed, each flat slab had one word carved on
it. Together they read like a chant: PEACE  1895–1921, PEACE  1890–1923,
PEACE  1910–1940, PEACE  1892–1959.
They were not dead people. They were words. Not even words. Wishes,
longings.
All these  years she had been harboring good feelings about Eva; sharing,
she believed, her loneliness and unloved state as no one else could or did.
She, after all, was the only one who really understood why Eva refused to
attend Sula’ s funeral. The others thought they knew; thought the
grandmother ’s reasons were the same as their own—that to pay respect to
someone who had caused them so much pain was beneath them. Nel, who
did go, believed  Eva’s refusal was not due to pride or vengean ce but to a
plain unwillingn ess to see the swallowing of her own flesh into the dirt, a
determination not to let the eyes see what the heart could not hold.
Now , however , after the way Eva had just treated her, accused her, she
wondered if the townspeople hadn’ t been right the first time. Eva was mean.
Sula had even said so. There was no good reason for her to speak so.
Feebleminded or not. Old. Whatever . Eva knew what she was doing.
Always had. She had stayed away from Sula’ s funeral and accused Nel of
drowning Chicken Little for spite. The same spite that galloped all over the
Bottom. That made every gesture an of fense, every of f-center smile a threat,
so that even the bubbles of relief that broke in the chest of practically
everybody when  Sula died did not soften their spite and allow them to go toMr. Hodges’ funeral parlor or send flowers from the church  or bake a
yellow cake.
She thought about Nathan open ing the bedroom door the day she had
visited her, and finding the body . He said he knew she was dead  right away
not because her eyes were open but because her mouth was. It looked to
him like a giant  yawn that she never got to finish. He had run across the
street to Teapot’ s Mamma, who, when she heard the news, said, “Ho!” like
the conductor on the train when it was about to take off except louder , and
then did a little dance. None of the women left their quilt patches in disarray
to run to the house. Nobody left the clothes halfway through the wringer to
run to the house. Even the men just said “uhn,” when they heard. The day
passed and no one came. The night slipped into another day and the body
was still lying in Eva’s bed gazing at the ceiling trying to complete a yawn.
It was very stran ge, this stubbornness about Sula. For even when China, the
most rambunctious whore in the town, died (whose black son and white son
said, when they heard she was dying, “She ain’t dead yet?”) , even then
everybody stopped what they were doing and turned out in numbers to put
the fallen sister away .
It was Nel who finally called the hospital, then the mortuary , then the
police, who were the ones to come. So the white people took over. They
came in a police  van and carried the body down the steps past the four pear
trees and into the van for all the world as with Hannah. When  the police
asked questions nobody gave them any information. It took them hours to
find out the dead woman’ s first name. The call was for a Miss  Peace at 7
Carpenter ’s Road. So they left with that: a body , a name and an address.
The white people had to wash her, dress her, prepare her and finally lower
her. It was all done elegantly , for it was discovered that she had a
substantial death  policy . Nel went to the funeral parlor , but was so shocked
by the closed cof fin she stayed only a few minutes.
The following day Nel walked to the burying and found herself  the only
black person there, steeling her mind to the roses and pulleys. It was only
when she turned to leave that she saw the cluster of black folk at the lip of
the cemetery . Not coming in, not dressed for mourning, but there waiting.Not until the white folks left—the gravediggers, Mr. and Mrs. Hodges, and
their young son who assisted them—did those black people from up in the
Bottom enter with hooded hearts and filed eyes to sing “Shall We Gather at
the River” over the curved earth that cut them off from the most
magnificent hatred they had ever known. Their question clotted the October
air, Shall We Gather at the River? The beautiful, the beautiful river?
Perhaps Sula answered them even then, for it began to rain, and the women
ran in tiny leaps  through the grass for fear their straightened hair would beat
them home.
Sadly , heavily , Nel left the color ed part of the cemetery . Further along the
road Shadrack passed her by. A little shaggier , a little older , still
energetically mad, he looked at the woman hurrying along the road with the
sunset in her face.
He stopped. T rying to remember where he had seen her before. The ef fort
of recol lection was too much for him and he moved on. He had to haul
some trash out at Sunnydale and it would be good and dark before he got
home. He hadn’ t sold fish in a long time now. The river had killed them all.
No more silver -gray flashes, no more flat, wide, unhurried look. No more
slowing down of gills. No more tremor on the line.
Shadrack and Nel moved in opposite directions, each thinking separate
thoughts about the past. The distance between them increased as they both
remembered gone things.
Suddenly Nel stopped. Her eye twitched and burned a little.
“Sula?” she whispered, gazing at the tops of trees. “Sula?”
Leaves stirred; mud shifted; there was the smell of overripe green things.
A soft ball of fur broke and scattered like dandelion spores in the breeze.
“All that time, all that time, I thought I was missing Jude.” And the loss
pressed down on her chest and came up into her throat. “We was girls
together ,” she said as though explaining something. “O Lord,  Sula,” she
cried, “girl, girl, girlgirlgirl.”It was a fine cry—loud and long—but it had no bottom and it had no top,
just circles and circles of sorrow .TONI MORRISON
S u l a
Toni Morrison is the Robert F . Goheen Professor of Humanities at Princeton
University . She has received the National Book Critics Circle Award and
the Pulitzer Prize. In 1993 she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature.
She lives in Rockland County , New Y ork, and Princeton, New Jersey .
ALSO BY T ONI MORRISON
FICTION
Love
Paradise
Jazz
Beloved
Tar Baby
Song of Solomon
The Bluest Eye
NONFICTION
The Dancing Mind
Playing in the Dark:
Whiteness and the Literary ImaginationACCLAIM FOR T ONI MORRISON’S
S u l a
“Sula is one of the most beautifully written, sustained works of fiction I
have read in some time…. [Morrison] is a major talent.”
—Elliot Anderson, Chicago T ribune
“As mournful as a spiritual and as angry as a clenched fist…written in
language so pure and resonant that it makes you ache.”
—Playboy
“In the first ranks of our living novelists.”
—St. Louis Post-Dispatch
“Toni Morrison’ s gifts are rare: the re-creation of the black experience in
America with both artistry and authenticity .”
—Library Journal
“Should be read and passed around by book lovers everywhere.”
—Los Angeles Fr ee Pr essFIRST VINT AGE INTERNA TIONAL EDITION, JUNE 2004
Copyright © 1973, 2004, and r enewed 2002 by T oni Morrison
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. Published in the United States by V intage Books, a division of
Random House, Inc., New Y ork, and simultaneously in Canada by Random
House of Canada Limited, T oronto. Originally published in slightly
different form in hardcover in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, a
division of Random House, Inc., New Y ork, in 1974.
Vintage is a registered trademark and V intage International and colophon
are trademarks of Random House, Inc.
The Library of Congress has cataloged the Knopf edition as follows:
Morrison, T oni.
Sula.
I. Title.
PZ4.M883Su [PS3563.08749]
813'.5'473-7278
www .vintagebooks.com
eISBN: 978-0-307-38813-1
v3.0also by toni morrison 
FICTION
Love
Paradise
Jazz
Beloved
T ar Baby
Song of Solomon
Sula
NONFICTION
The Dancing Mind
Playing in the Dark:
Whiteness and the Literary ImaginationPARADI S E  This book has been optimized for viewing  
at a monitor setting of 1024 x 768 pixels.  I
Alfred A. Knopf 
new york • toronto 
1998 
PARAD S E  
TONIMORRISONthis is a borzoi book  
published by alfred a. knopf, inc.,  
and alfred a. knopf canada  
Copyright © 1997 by Toni Morrison 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American 
Copyright Conventions. Published in the United States 
by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., New York, and distributed by 
Random House, Inc., New York. Published simultaneously 
in Canada by Alfred A. Knopf Canada, a division of 
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto, and distributed 
by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto. 
www.randomhouse.com 
LC 97-80913 eISBN: 978-0-307-38811-7 
v1.0 Lois For many are the pleasant forms which exist in 
numerous sins,  
and incontinencies,  
and disgraceful passions  
and ﬂeeting pleasures,  
which (men) embrace until they become 
sober 
and go up to their resting place. 
And they will ﬁnd me there, 
and they will live, 
and they will not die again. RUB Y  They shoot the white girl ﬁrst. With the rest they can take their 
time. No need to hurry out here. They are seventeen miles from 
a town which has ninety miles between it and any other. Hiding places 
will be plentiful in the Convent, but there is time and the day has just 
begun. 
They are nine, over twice the number of the women they are 
obliged to stampede or kill and they have the paraphernalia for either 
requirement: rope, a palm leaf cross, handcuffs, Mace and sunglasses, 
along with clean, handsome guns. 
They have never been this deep in the Convent. Some of them 
have parked Chevrolets near its porch to pick up a string of peppers or 
have gone into the kitchen for a gallon of barbecue sauce; but only a 
few have seen the halls, the chapel, the schoolroom, the bedrooms. 
Now they all will. And at last they will see the cellar and expose its ﬁlth 
to the light that is soon to scour the Oklahoma sky. Meantime they are 
startled by the clothes they are wearing—suddenly aware of being ill-
dressed. For at the dawn of a July day how could they have guessed the 
cold that is inside this place? Their T-shirts, work shirts and dashikis 
soak up cold like fever. Those who have worn work shoes are unnerved 
by the thunder of their steps on marble ﬂoors; those in Pro-Keds by the 
silence. Then there is the grandeur. Only the two who are wearing ties 
seem to belong here and one by one each is reminded that before it 
was a Convent, this house was an embezzler’s folly. A mansion where 
bisque and rose-tone marble ﬂoors segue into teak ones. Isinglass holds 
yesterday’s light and patterns walls that were stripped and whitewashed 
3 P ARADISE  
ﬁfty years ago. The ornate bathroom ﬁxtures, which sickened the nuns, 
were replaced with good plain spigots, but the princely tubs and sinks, 
which could not be inexpensively removed, remain coolly corrupt. 
The embezzler’s joy that could be demolished was, particularly in the 
dining room, which the nuns converted to a schoolroom, where stilled 
Arapaho girls once sat and learned to forget. 
Now armed men search rooms where macramé baskets ﬂoat next 
to Flemish candelabra; where Christ and His mother glow in niches 
trimmed in grapevines. The Sisters of the Sacred Cross chipped away 
all the nymphs, but curves of their marble hair still strangle grape 
leaves and tease the fruit. The chill intensiﬁes as the men spread 
deeper into the mansion, taking their time, looking, listening, alert to 
the female malice that hides here and the yeast-and-butter smell of 
rising dough. 
One of them, the youngest, looks back, forcing himself to see how 
the dream he is in might go. The shot woman, lying uncomfortably on 
marble, waves her ﬁngers at him—or seems to. So his dream is doing 
okay, except for its color. He has never before dreamed in colors such 
as these: imperial black sporting a wild swipe of red, then thick, fever -
ish yellow. Like the clothes of an easily had woman. The leading man 
pauses, raising his left hand to halt the silhouettes behind him. They 
stop, editing their breath, making friendly adjustments in the grip of 
riﬂes and handguns. The leading man turns and gestures the separa -
tions: you two over there to the kitchen; two more upstairs; two others 
into the chapel. He saves himself, his brother and the one who thinks 
he is dreaming for the cellar. 
They part gracefully without words or haste. Earlier, when they 
blew open the Convent door, the nature of their mission made them 
giddy. But the target, after all, is detritus: throwaway people that some -
times blow back into the room after being swept out the door. So the 
venom is manageable now. Shooting the ﬁrst woman (the white one) 
has clariﬁed it like butter: the pure oil of hatred on top, its hardness 
stabilized below. 
Outside, the mist is waist high. It will turn silver soon and make 
grass rainbows low enough for children’s play before the sun burns it 
off, exposing acres of bluestem and maybe witch tracks as well. 
4 Ruby  
... 
The kitchen is bigger than the house in which either man was 
born. The ceiling barn-rafter high. More shelving than Ace’s Grocery 
Store. The table is fourteen feet long if an inch, and it’s easy to tell that 
the women they are hunting have been taken by surprise. At one end a 
full pitcher of milk stands near four bowls of shredded wheat. At the 
other end vegetable chopping has been interrupted: scallion piled like 
a handful of green confetti nestles brilliant disks of carrot, and the 
potatoes, peeled and whole, are bone white, wet and crisp. Stock sim -
mers on the stove. It is restaurant size with eight burners and on a shelf 
beneath the great steel hood a dozen loaves of bread swell. A stool is 
overturned. There are no windows. 
One man signals the other to open the pantry while he goes to the 
back door. It is closed but unlocked. Peering out he sees an old hen, 
her puffed and bloody hind parts cherished, he supposes, for deliver -
ing freaks—double, triple yolks in outsize and misshapen shells. Soft 
stuttering comes from the coop beyond; fryers padding conﬁdently 
into the yard’s mist disappear, reappear and disappear again, each ﬂat 
eye indifferent to anything but breakfast. No footprints disturb the mud 
around the stone steps. This man closes the door and joins his partner 
at the pantry. Together they scan dusty mason jars and what is left of 
last year’s canning: tomatoes, green beans, peaches. Slack, they think. 
August just around the corner and these women have not even sorted, 
let alone washed, the jars. 
He turns the ﬁre off under the stockpot. His mother bathed him in 
a pot no bigger than that. A luxury in the sod house where she was 
born. The house he lives in is big, comfortable, and this town is 
resplendent compared to his birthplace, which had gone from feet to 
belly in ﬁfty years. From Haven, a dreamtown in Oklahoma Territory, 
to Haven, a ghosttown in Oklahoma State. Freedmen who stood tall 
in 1889 dropped to their knees in 1934 and were stomach-crawling 
by 1948. That is why they are here in this Convent. To make sure it 
never happens again. That nothing inside or out rots the one all-black 
town worth the pain. All the others he knew about or heard tell of 
knuckled to or merged with white towns; otherwise, like Haven, they 
5 P ARADISE  
had shriveled into tracery: foundation outlines marked by the way 
grass grew there, wallpaper turned negative behind missing window -
panes, schoolhouse ﬂoors moved aside by elder trees growing toward 
the bell housing. One thousand citizens in 1905 becoming ﬁve hun -
dred by 1934. Then two hundred, then eighty as cotton collapsed or 
railroad companies laid their tracks elsewhere. Subsistence farming, 
once the only bounty a large family needed, became just scrap farming 
as each married son got his bit, which had to be broken up into more 
pieces for his children, until ﬁnally the owners of the bits and pieces 
who had not walked off in disgust welcomed any offer from a white 
speculator, so eager were they to get away and try someplace else. A big 
city this time, or a small town—anywhere that was already built. 
But he and the others, veterans all, had a different idea. Loving 
what Haven had been—the idea of it and its reach—they carried that 
devotion, gentling and nursing it from Bataan to Guam, from Iwo 
Jima to Stuttgart, and they made up their minds to do it again. He 
touched the stove hood admiring its construction and power. It was the 
same length as the brick oven that once sat in the middle of his home -
town. When they got back to the States, they took it apart, carrying the 
bricks, the hearthstone and its iron plate two hundred and forty miles 
west—far far from the old Creek Nation which once upon a time a 
witty government called “unassigned land.” He remembers the cere -
mony they’d had when the Oven’s iron lip was recemented into place 
and its worn letters polished for all to see. He himself had helped clean 
off sixty-two years of carbon and animal fat so the words shone as 
brightly as they did in 1890 when they were new. And if it hurt— 
pulling asunder what their grandfathers had put together—it was 
nothing compared to what they had endured and what they might 
become if they did not begin anew. As new fathers, who had fought the 
world, they could not (would not) be less than the Old Fathers who 
had outfoxed it; who had not let danger or natural evil keep them from 
cutting Haven out of mud and who knew enough to seal their triumph 
with that priority. An Oven. Round as a head, deep as desire. Living in 
or near their wagons, boiling meal in the open, cutting sod and 
mesquite for shelter, the Old Fathers did that ﬁrst: put most of their 
strength into constructing the huge, ﬂawlessly designed Oven that 
6 Ruby  
both nourished them and monumentalized what they had done. 
When it was ﬁnished—each pale brick perfectly pitched; the chimney 
wide, lofty; the pegs and grill secure; the draft pulling steadily from the 
tail hole; the ﬁre door plumb—then the ironmonger did his work. 
From barrel staves and busted axles, from kettles and bent nails, he 
fashioned an iron plate ﬁve feet by two and set it at the base of the 
Oven’s mouth. It is still not clear where the words came from. Some -
thing he heard, invented, or something whispered to him while he 
slept curled over his tools in a wagon bed. His name was Morgan and 
who knew if he invented or stole the half-dozen or so words he forged. 
Words that seemed at ﬁrst to bless them; later to confound them; 
ﬁnally to announce that they had lost. 
The man eyes the kitchen sink. He moves to the long table and 
lifts the pitcher of milk. He sniffs it ﬁrst and then, the pistol in his right 
hand, he uses his left to raise the pitcher to his mouth, taking such 
long, measured swallows the milk is half gone by the time he smells 
the wintergreen. 
On the ﬂoor above two men walk the hall and examine the four bed -
rooms, each with a name card taped on its door. The ﬁrst name, writ -
ten in lipstick, is Seneca. The next, Divine, is inked in capital letters. 
They exchange knowing looks when they learn that each woman 
sleeps not in a bed, like normal people, but in a hammock. Other than 
that, and except for a narrow desk or an end table, there is no addi -
tional furniture. No clothes in the closets, of course, since the women 
wore no-ﬁt dirty dresses and nothing you could honestly call shoes. But 
there are strange things nailed or taped to the walls or propped in a 
corner. A 1968 calendar, large X’s marking various dates (April 4, July 
19); a letter written in blood so smeary its satanic message cannot be 
deciphered; an astrology chart; a fedora tilted on the plastic neck of 
a female torso, and, in a place that once housed Christians—well, 
Catholics anyway—not a cross of Jesus anywhere. But what alarms the 
two men most is the series of infant booties and shoes ribboned to a 
cord hanging from a crib in the last bedroom they enter. A teething 
ring, cracked and stiff, dangles among the tiny shoes. Signaling with 
7 P ARADISE  
his eyes, one man directs his partner to four more bedrooms on the 
opposite side of the hall. He himself moves closer to the bouquet of 
baby shoes. Looking for what? More evidence? He isn’t sure. Blood? A 
little toe, maybe, left in a white calfskin shoe? He slides the safety on 
his gun and joins the search across the hall. 
These rooms are normal. Messy—the ﬂoor in one of them is cov -
ered with food-encrusted dishes, dirty cups, its bed invisible under a 
hill of clothes; another room sports two rocking chairs full of dolls; a 
third the debris and smell of a heavy drinker—but normal at least. 
His saliva is bitter and although he knows this place is diseased, he 
is startled by the whip of pity ﬂicking in his chest. What, he wonders, 
could do this to women? How can their plain brains think up such 
things: revolting sex, deceit and the sly torture of children? Out here in 
wide-open space tucked away in a mansion—no one to bother or 
insult them—they managed to call into question the value of almost 
every woman he knew. The winter coat money for which his father 
saved in secret for two harvests; the light in his mother’s eyes when she 
stroked its seal collar. The surprise party he and his brothers threw for a 
sister’s sixteenth birthday. Yet here, not twenty miles away from a quiet, 
orderly community, there were women like none he knew or ever 
heard tell of. In this place of all places. Unique and isolated, his was a 
town justiﬁably pleased with itself. It neither had nor needed a jail. No 
criminals had ever come from his town. And the one or two people 
who acted up, humiliated their families or threatened the town’s view 
of itself were taken good care of. Certainly there wasn’t a slack or 
sloven woman anywhere in town and the reasons, he thought, were 
clear. From the beginning its people were free and protected. A sleep -
less woman could always rise from her bed, wrap a shawl around her 
shoulders and sit on the steps in the moonlight. And if she felt like it 
she could walk out the yard and on down the road. No lamp and no 
fear. A hiss-crackle from the side of the road would never scare her 
because whatever it was that made the sound, it wasn’t something 
creeping up on her. Nothing for ninety miles around thought she was 
prey. She could stroll as slowly as she liked, think of food preparations, 
war, of family things, or lift her eyes to stars and think of nothing at all. 
Lampless and without fear she could make her way. And if a light 
8 Ruby  
shone from a house up a ways and the cry of a colicky baby caught her 
attention, she might step over to the house and call out softly to the 
woman inside trying to soothe the baby. The two of them might take 
turns massaging the infant stomach, rocking, or trying to get a little 
soda water down. When the baby quieted they could sit together for a 
spell, gossiping, chuckling low so as not to wake anybody else. 
The woman could decide to go back to her own house then, 
refreshed and ready to sleep, or she might keep her direction and walk 
further down the road, past other houses, past the three churches, past 
the feedlot. On out, beyond the limits of town, because nothing at the 
edge thought she was prey. 
At each end of the hall is a bathroom. As each man enters one, 
neither is working his jaws because both believe they are prepared for 
anything. In one bathroom, the biggest, the taps are too small and 
dowdy for the wide sink. The bathtub rests on the backs of four 
mermaids—their tails split wide for the tub’s security, their breasts 
arched for stability. The tile underfoot is bottle green. A Modess box 
is on the toilet tank and a bucket of soiled things stands nearby. There 
is no toilet paper. Only one mirror has not been covered with chalky 
paint and that one the man ignores. He does not want to see himself 
stalking females or their liquid. With relief he backs out and closes the 
door. With relief he lets his handgun point down. 
Downstairs two men, a father and his son, are not smiling, although 
when they ﬁrst enter the chapel they feel like it because it was true: 
graven idols were worshipped here. Tiny men and women in white 
dresses and capes of blue and gold stand on little shelves cut into 
niches in the wall. Holding a baby or gesturing, their blank faces fake 
innocence. Candles had obviously burned at their feet and, just as 
Reverend Pulliam said, food had probably been offered as well, since 
there were little bowls on either side of the doorway. When this was 
over they would tell Reverend Pulliam how right he was and laugh in 
Reverend Misner’s face. 
There were irreconcilable differences among the congregations in 
town, but members from all of them merged solidly on the necessity of 
9 P ARADISE  
this action: Do what you have to. Neither the Convent nor the women 
in it can continue. 
Pity. Once, the Convent had been a true if aloof neighbor, sur -
rounded by corn, buffalo grass, clover and approached by a dirt track 
barely seen from the road. The mansion-turned-Convent was there 
long before the town, and the last boarding Arapaho girls had already 
gone when the ﬁfteen families arrived. That was twenty-ﬁve years ago, 
when all their dreams outstretched the men who had them. A road 
straight as a die had been cleared through the center of town and lined 
on one side by a paved walk. Seven of the families had more than ﬁve 
hundred acres, three had nearly a thousand. By and by, when the road 
became a named street, a man named Ossie organized a horse race to 
celebrate. From army-issue tents, half-ﬁnished houses and freshly 
cleared land people rode in, bringing what they had. Out came stored-
away things and things got up on the spot: guitars and late melon, 
hazelnuts, rhubarb pies and a mouth organ, a washboard, roast lamb, 
pepper rice, Lil Green, “In the Dark,” Louis Jordan and His Tympany 
Five; homemade beer and groundhog meat fried and simmered in 
gravy. The women tied bright scarves over their hair; the children 
made themselves hats of wild poppies and river vine. Ossie owned 
a two-year-old and a four, both fast and pretty as brides. The other 
horses were simply company: Ace’s spotted horse, Miss Esther’s 
ancient featherweight, all four of Nathan’s plow horses plus his mare 
and a half-broke pony that, unclaimed, grazed the creekbank. 
The riders quarreled so long over saddle or bareback, the mothers 
of nursing babies told them to mount or change roles. The men 
argued handicaps and placed quarter bets with abandon. When the 
gun went off only three horses leapt forward. The rest stepped sideways 
or cut out over lumber stacked near unﬁnished homes. When the race 
ﬁnally got under way, the women yelled from the meadow, while their 
children shrieked and danced in grass up to their shoulders. The pony 
ﬁnished ﬁrst, but since it lost its rider two furlongs out, the winner was 
Nathan’s auburn mare. The little girl with the most poppies on her 
head was chosen to present the ﬁrst-place ribbon hung with Ossie’s 
Purple Heart. The winner was seven years old then and grinning as 
though he’d won the Kentucky Derby. Now he was somewhere down 
10 Ruby  
in the cellar of a Convent watching out for awful women who, when 
they came, one by one, were obviously not nuns, real or even pretend, 
but members, it was thought, of some other cult. Nobody knew. But it 
wasn’t important to know because all of them, each in her turn, and 
like the old Mother Superior and the servant who used to, still sold 
produce, barbecue sauce, good bread and the hottest peppers in the 
world. For a pricey price you could buy a string of the purply black 
peppers or a relish made from them. Either took the cake for pure 
burning power. The relish lasted years with proper attention, and 
though many customers tried planting the seeds, the pepper grew 
nowhere outside the Convent’s garden. 
Strange neighbors, most folks said, but harmless. More than harm -
less, helpful even on occasion. They took people in—lost folk or folks 
who needed a rest. Early reports were of kindness and very good food. 
But now everybody knew it was all a lie, a front, a carefully planned 
disguise for what was really going on. Once the emergency was plain, 
representatives from all three churches met at the Oven because they 
couldn’t agree on which, if any, church should host a meeting to 
decide on what to do now that the women had ignored all warnings. 
It was a secret meeting, but the rumors had been whispered for 
more than a year. Outrages that had been accumulating all along took 
shape as evidence. A mother was knocked down the stairs by her cold-
eyed daughter. Four damaged infants were born in one family. Daugh -
ters refused to get out of bed. Brides disappeared on their honeymoons. 
Two brothers shot each other on New Year’s Day. Trips to Demby for 
VD shots common. And what went on at the Oven these days was 
not to be believed. So when nine men decided to meet there, they had 
to run everybody off the place with shotguns before they could sit in 
the beams of their ﬂashlights to take matters into their own hands. The 
proof they had been collecting since the terrible discovery in the 
spring could not be denied: the one thing that connected all these 
catastrophes was in the Convent. And in the Convent were those 
women. 
The father walks the aisle checking the pews right and left. He 
runs a frond of light from his Black & Decker under each seat. The 
knee rests are turned up. At the altar he pauses. One window of pale 
11 P ARADISE  
yellow ﬂoats above him in the dimness. Things look uncleaned. He 
steps to a tray of small glasses positioned on the wall to see if any food 
offerings remain there. Except for grime and spider webbing, the red 
glasses are empty. Maybe they are not for food but for money. Or trash? 
There is a gum wrapper in the dirtiest one. Doublemint. 
He shakes his head and joins his son back at the altar. The son 
points. The father beams the wall below the yellow window where, just 
barely, the sun announces. The outline of a huge cross comes into 
view. Clean as new paint is the space where there used to be a Jesus. 
The brothers approaching the cellar were once identical. Although 
they are twins, their wives look more alike than they do. One is 
smooth, agile and smokes Te Amo cigars. The other is tougher, 
meaner, but hides his face when he prays. But both have wide inno -
cent eyes and both are as single-minded now standing before a closed 
door as they were in 1942 when they enlisted. Then they were looking 
for an out—a break away from a life where all was owed, nothing 
owned. Now they want in. Then, in the forties, they had nothing to 
lose. Now everything requires their protection. From the beginning 
when the town was founded they knew isolation did not guarantee 
safety. Men strong and willing were needed when lost or aimless 
strangers did not just drive through, hardly glancing at a sleepy town 
with three churches within one mile of one another but nothing to 
serve a traveler: no diner, no police, no gas station, no public phone, 
no movie house, no hospital. Sometimes, if they were young and 
drunk or old and sober, the strangers might spot three or four colored 
girls walk-dawdling along the side of the road. Walking a few yards, 
stopping as their talk required; skipping on, pausing to laugh or slap 
another’s arm in play. The strangers get interested in them, perhaps. 
Three cars, say, a ’53 Bel Air, green with cream-colored interior, 
license number 085 B, six cylinders, double molding on rear fender 
pontoon, Powerglide two-speed automatic transmission; and say a ’49 
Dodge Wayfarer, black, cracked rear window, fender skirts, ﬂuid drive, 
checkerboard grille; and a ’53 Oldsmobile with Arkansas plates. The 
drivers slow down, put their heads out the windows and holler. Their 
12 Ruby  
eyes crinkled in mischief they drive around the girls, making U-turns 
and K’s, churning up grass seed in front of the houses, ﬂushing cats in 
front of Ace’s Grocery Store. Circling. The girls’ eyes freeze as they 
back into each other. Then, one at a time, the townsmen come out of 
the houses, the backyards, off the scaffold of the bank, out of the feed 
store. One of the passengers has opened the front of his trousers and 
hung himself out the window to scare the girls. The girls’ little hearts 
stand up and they cannot close their eyes fast enough, so they jerk their 
heads aside. But the townsmen do look at it, see the wish in this most 
militant of gestures, and smile. Smile reluctantly and in spite of them -
selves because they know that from this moment on, if not before, this 
man, till his ﬁnal illness, will do as much serious damage to colored 
folks as he can. 
More men come out, and more. Their guns are not pointing 
at anything, just held slackly against their thighs. Twenty men; now 
twenty-ﬁve. Circling the circling cars. Ninety miles from the nearest O 
for operator and ninety from the nearest badge. If the day had been 
dry, the dust spuming behind the tires would have discolored them all. 
As it was, just a little gravel kicked up in the tread they left behind. 
The twins have powerful memories. Between them they remem -
ber the details of everything that ever happened—things they wit -
nessed and things they have not. The exact temperature of the weather 
when the cars circled the girls as well as the bushel yield of every farm 
in the county. And they have never forgotten the message or the 
speciﬁcs of any story, especially the controlling one told to them by 
their grandfather—the man who put the words in the Oven’s black 
mouth. A story that explained why neither the founders of Haven 
nor their descendants could tolerate anybody but themselves. On 
the journey from Mississippi and two Louisiana parishes to Oklahoma, 
the one hundred and ﬁfty-eight freedmen were unwelcome on each 
grain of soil from Yazoo to Fort Smith. Turned away by rich Choctaw 
and poor whites, chased by yard dogs, jeered at by camp prostitutes 
and their children, they were nevertheless unprepared for the aggres -
sive discouragement they received from Negro towns already being 
built. The headline of a feature in the Herald, “Come Prepared or Not 
at All,” could not mean them, could it? Smart, strong, and eager to 
13 P ARADISE  
work their own land, they believed they were more than prepared— 
they were destined. It stung them into confusion to learn they did not 
have enough money to satisfy the restrictions the “self-supporting” 
Negroes required. In short, they were too poor, too bedraggled-looking 
to enter, let alone reside in, the communities that were solicit -
ing Negro homesteaders. This contemptuous dismissal by the lucky 
changed the temperature of their blood twice. First they boiled at 
being written up as “people who preferred saloons and crap games 
to homes, churches and schools.” Then, remembering their spectacu -
lar history, they cooled. What began as overheated determination 
became cold-blooded obsession. “They don’t know we or about we,” 
said one man. “Us free like them; was slave like them. What for is this 
difference?” 
Denied and guarded against, they altered their route and made 
their way west of the unassigned lands, south of Logan County, across 
the Canadian River into Arapaho territory. Becoming stiffer, prouder 
with each misfortune, the details of which were engraved into the 
twins’ powerful memories. Unembellished stories told and retold in 
dark barns, near the Oven at sunset, in the Sunday afternoon light of 
prayer meetings. About the saddles of the four black-skinned bandits 
who fed them dried buffalo meat before robbing them of their riﬂes. 
About the soundlessness of the funnel that twisted through and around 
their camp; the sleeping children who woke sailing through the air. 
The glint of the horses on which watching Choctaw sat. At supper -
time, when it was too dark for any work except that which could be 
done by ﬁrelight, the Old Fathers recited the stories of that journey: 
the signs God gave to guide them—to watering places, to Creek with 
whom they could barter their labor for wagons, horses and pasture; 
away from prairie-dog towns ﬁfty miles wide and Satan’s malefactions: 
abandoned women with no belongings, rumors of riverbed gold. 
The twins believed it was when he discovered how narrow the 
path of righteousness could be that their grandfather chose the words 
for the Oven’s lip. Furniture was held together by wooden dowels 
because nails were so expensive, but he sacriﬁced his treasure of three-
inch and four, bent and straight, to say something important that 
would last. 
14 Ruby  
Once the letters were in place, but before anyone had time to pon -
der the words they formed, a roof was raised next to where the Oven sat 
waiting to be seasoned. On crates and makeshift benches, Haven peo -
ple gathered for talk, for society and the comfort of hot game. Later, 
when buffalo grass gave way to a nice little town with a street down the 
middle, wooden houses, one church, a school, a store, the citizens still 
gathered there. They pierced guinea hens and whole deer for the spit; 
they turned the ribs and rubbed extra salt into sides of cooling veal. 
Those were the days of slow cooking, when ﬂames were kept so low a 
twenty-pound turkey roasted all night and a side could take two days to 
cook down to the bone. Whenever livestock was slaughtered, or when 
the taste for unsmoked game was high, Haven people brought the kill 
to the Oven and stayed sometimes to fuss and quarrel with the Morgan 
family about seasonings and the proper test for “done.” They stayed to 
gossip, complain, roar with laughter and drink walking coffee in the 
shade of the eaves. And any child in earshot was subject to being 
ordered to fan ﬂies, haul wood, clean the worktable or beat the earth 
with a tamping block. 
In 1910 there were two churches in Haven and the All-Citizens 
Bank, four rooms in the schoolhouse, ﬁve stores selling dry goods, feed 
and foodstuffs—but the trafﬁc to and from the Oven was greater than 
to all of those. No family needed more than a simple cookstove as long 
as the Oven was alive, and it always was. Even in 1934 when every -
thing else about the town was dying; when it was clear as daylight that 
talk of electricity would remain just talk and when gas lines and sewers 
were Tulsa marvels, the Oven stayed alive. Until the Big Drought, run -
ning water was not missed because the well was deep. As boys, the 
twins had swung overhand from the cottonwood branches leaning 
near it and hung dangerously above the clear water to admire the 
reﬂection of their feet. Time after time they heard stories of the blue 
dresses and bonnets the men bought for the women with cash from the 
ﬁrst harvest or the ﬁrst cuts from the herd. The theatrical arrival of the 
Saint Louis piano, ordered soon as Zion’s ﬂoor was laid. They imag -
ined their mother as a ten-year-old among other young girls clustered 
quietly about the piano, sneaking a touch, a key stroke before the dea -
coness slapped their hands away. Their pure sopranos at rehearsal 
15 P ARADISE  
singing “He will take care of yo u..., ” which He did, safe to say, until 
He stopped. 
The twins were born in 1924 and heard for twenty years what the 
previous forty had been like. They listened to, imagined and remem -
bered every single thing because each detail was a jolt of pleasure, 
erotic as a dream, out-thrilling and more purposeful than even the war 
they had fought in. 
In 1949, young and newly married, they were anything but fools. 
Long before the war, Haven residents were leaving and those who had 
not packed up were planning to. The twins stared at their dwindling 
postwar future and it was not hard to persuade other home boys to 
repeat what the Old Fathers had done in 1890. Ten generations had 
known what lay Out There: space, once beckoning and free, became 
unmonitored and seething; became a void where random and orga -
nized evil erupted when and where it chose—behind any standing 
tree, behind the door of any house, humble or grand. Out There 
where your children were sport, your women quarry, and where your 
very person could be annulled; where congregations carried arms to 
church and ropes coiled in every saddle. Out There where every clus -
ter of whitemen looked like a posse, being alone was being dead. But 
lessons had been learned and relearned in the last three generations 
about how to protect a town. So, like the ex-slaves who knew what 
came ﬁrst, the ex-soldiers broke up the Oven and loaded it into two 
trucks even before they took apart their own beds. Before ﬁrst light in 
the middle of August, ﬁfteen families moved out of Haven—headed 
not for Muskogee or California as some had, or Saint Louis, Houston, 
Langston or Chicago, but deeper into Oklahoma, as far as they could 
climb from the grovel contaminating the town their grandfathers had 
made. 
“How long?” asked the children from the back seats of the cars. 
“How long will it be?” 
“Soon,” the parents replied. Hour after hour, the answer was the 
same. “Soon. Pretty soon.” When they saw Beaver Creek sliding 
through the muzzle of a state shaped like a gun, on through the acres 
of grass (cheaper than cheap after the tornadoes of 1949) that their 
pooled discharge pay had bought, it was pretty, soon and right on time. 
16 Ruby  
What they left behind was a town whose once proud streets were 
weed-choked, monitored now by eighteen stubborn people wondering 
how they could get to the post ofﬁce where there might be a letter from 
long gone grandchildren. Where the Oven had been, small green 
snakes slept in the sun. Who could have imagined that twenty-ﬁve 
years later in a brand-new town a Convent would beat out the snakes, 
the Depression, the tax man and the railroad for sheer destructive 
power? 
Now one brother, a leader in everything, smashes the cellar door 
with the butt of his riﬂe. The other waits a few feet back with their 
nephew. All three descend the steps ready and excited to know. They 
are not disappointed. What they see is the devil’s bedroom, bathroom, 
and his nasty playpen. 
The nephew always knew that his mother had tried as hard as she 
could to hang on. She had managed to see him ride the winning 
horse, but beyond that she had no strength. Not even enough to get 
interested in the debates about what to call this place she had traveled 
to with her brothers and her little boy. For three years New Haven had 
been the name most agreed to, although a few were loud in suggest -
ing other names—names that did not speak, they said, of failure 
new or repeated. Paciﬁc veterans liked Guam, others Inchon. Those 
who fought in Europe kept coming up with names only the chil -
dren enjoyed pronouncing. The women had no ﬁrm opinion until the 
nephew’s mother died. Her funeral—the town’s ﬁrst—stopped the 
schedule of discussion and its necessity. They named the town after 
one of their own and the men did not gainsay them. All right. Well. 
Ruby. Young Ruby. 
It pleased his uncles who could then both mourn the sister and 
honor the friend and brother-in-law who didn’t make it back. But 
the nephew, winner of Ossie’s Purple Heart, heir to his father’s dog 
tags, witness to his mother’s name painted on signs and written on 
envelopes for the rest of his life, was displaced by these sad markings. 
The heart, the tags, the post ofﬁce designation outsized him somehow. 
The women who had known and tended his mother spoiled Ruby’s 
17 P ARADISE  
boy. The men who enlisted with his father favored Ruby’s husband’s 
boy. The uncles took him for granted. When the decision was taken at 
the Oven, he was there. But two hours ago, when they’d swallowed the 
last piece of red meat, an uncle simply tapped him on the shoulder 
and said, “We got coffee in the truck. Go get your riﬂe.” Which he 
did, but he took the palm cross too. 
It was four in the morning when they left; going on ﬁve when they 
arrived because, not wanting engine hum or headlights to ruin their 
cover of darkness, they walked the ﬁnal miles. They parked the trucks 
in a copse of shin oak, for light could signal uninterrupted for mile 
upon mile in this country. When casing heads for ﬁfty miles were 
invisible, a lit birthday cake could be spotted as soon as the match was 
struck. Half a mile from their destination fog surrounded them to their 
hips. They reached the Convent just seconds before the sun did and 
had a moment to see and register for all time how the mansion ﬂoated, 
dark and malevolently disconnected from God’s earth. 
In the schoolroom, which used to be a dining room and now has 
no function except storage of desks pushed to the wall, the view is 
clear. The men of Ruby bunch at its windows. Finding nothing but 
conﬁrming evidence elsewhere in the Convent, they gather here. The 
New Fathers of Ruby, Oklahoma. The chill they ﬁrst encountered is 
gone; so is the mist. They are animated—warm with perspiration and 
the nocturnal odor of righteousness. The view is clear. 
Track. That’s all the nephew can think of. Four-hundred-yard 
dashers or even the three-mile runners. The heads of two of them are 
thrown back as far as their necks will allow; ﬁsts tight as their arms 
pump and stretch for distance. One has her nappy head down, butting 
air and time wide open, one hand reaching for a winner’s wire 
nowhere in her future. Their mouths are open, pulling in breath, giv -
ing up none. The legs of all are off the ground, split wide above the 
clover. 
Bodacious black Eves unredeemed by Mary, they are like pan -
icked does leaping toward a sun that has ﬁnished burning off the mist 
and now pours its holy oil over the hides of game. 
God at their side, the men take aim. For Ruby. 
18 MAVIS  The neighbors seemed pleased when the babies smothered. Prob -
ably because the mint green Cadillac in which they died had 
annoyed them for some time. They did all the right things, of course: 
brought food, telephoned their sorrow, got up a collection; but the 
shine of excitement in their eyes was clear. 
When the journalist came, Mavis sat in the corner of the sofa, not 
sure whether to scrape the potato chip crumbs from the seams of the 
plastic cover or tuck them further in. But the journalist wanted the 
photo taken ﬁrst, so the photographer ordered Mavis to the middle of 
the sofa, with the surviving children on either side of their distraught 
and grieving mother. She asked for the father too, of course. Jim? Is it 
Jim Albright? But Mavis said he wasn’t feeling so good, couldn’t come 
out, they’d have to go ahead without him. The journalist and the pho -
tographer exchanged looks, and Mavis thought they probably knew 
anyway that Frank—not Jim—was sitting on the edge of the bathtub 
drinking Seagram’s without a glass. 
Mavis moved to the center of the sofa and cleaned her ﬁngernails 
of potato chip dust until the other children joined her. The “other 
children” is what they would always be now. Sal put her arm around 
her mother’s waist. Frankie and Billy James were squished together on 
her right. Sal pinched her, hard. Mavis knew instantly that her daugh -
ter wasn’t nervous before the camera and all, because the pinch grew 
long, pointed. Sal’s ﬁngernails were diving for blood. 
“This must be terrible for you.” Her name, she said, was June. 
“Yes, m’am. It’s terrible for all of us.” 
21 P ARADISE  
“Is there something you want to say? Something you want other 
mothers to know?” 
“M’am?” 
June crossed her knees and Mavis saw that this was the ﬁrst time 
she had worn the white high-heeled shoes. The soles were barely 
smudged. “You know. Something to warn them, caution them, about 
negligence.” 
“Well.” Mavis took a deep breath. “I can’t think of any. I guess. I.” 
The photographer squatted, cocking his head as he examined the 
possibilities. 
“So some good can come out of this awful tragedy?” June’s smile 
was sad. 
Mavis straightened against the success of Sal’s ﬁngernails. The 
camera clicked. June moved her felt-tipped pen into place. It was a 
ﬁne thing. Mavis had never seen anything like it—made ink on the 
paper but dry, not all blotty. “I don’t have nothing to say to strangers 
right now.” 
For the second time the photographer adjusted the front window 
shade and walked back to the sofa holding a black box to Mavis’ face. 
“I understand,” said June. Her eyes went soft, but the shine was 
like that of the neighbors. “And I do hate to put you through this, but 
maybe you could just tell me what happened? Our readers are simply 
appalled. Twins and all. Oh, and they want you to know you are in 
their prayers every single day.” She let her glance sweep the boys and 
Sal. “And you all too. They are praying for each and every one of you.” 
Frankie and Billy James looked down at their bare feet. Sal rested 
her head on her mother’s shoulder while she clenched the ﬂesh at 
Mavis’ waist. 
“So could you tell us?” June smiled a smile that meant “Do me 
this favor.” 
“Well.” Mavis frowned. She wanted to get it right this time. “He 
didn’t want the Spam. I mean the kids like it but he don’t so. In this 
heat you can’t keep much meat. I had a whole chuck steak go green on 
me once so I went and took the car, just some weenies, and I thought, 
well, Merle and Pearl. I was against it at ﬁrst but he said—” 
“M-e-r-l-e?” 
22 Mavis  
“Yes, m’am.” 
“Go on.” 
“They wasn’t crying or nothing but he said his head hurt. I under -
stood. I did. You can’t expect a man to come home from that kind of 
work and have to watch over babies while I go get something decent to 
put in front of him. I know that ain’t right.” 
“So you took the twins. Why didn’t you take the other children 
along?” 
“It’s a weasel out back,” said Frankie. 
“Groundhog,” said Billy James. 
“Shut!” Sal leaned over Mavis’ stomach and pointed at her 
brothers. 
June smiled. “Wouldn’t it have been safer,” she continued, “with 
the other children in the car? I mean, they’re older.” 
Mavis slid her thumb under her bra strap, pulling it back over her 
shoulder. “I wasn’t expecting no danger. Higgledy Piggledy is just yon -
der. I could of went to the Convenience but their stuff sits too long 
for me.” 
“So you left the newborns in the car and went in to buy some 
chuck steak—” 
“No, m’am. Weenies.” 
“Right. Wieners.” June was writing quickly but didn’t seem to be 
crossing out anything. “But what I want to ask is, why did it take so 
long? To buy one item.” 
“It didn’t. Take long. I couldn’t of been in there more than ﬁve 
minutes, tops.” 
“Your babies suffocated, Mrs. Albright. In a hot car with the win -
dows closed. No air. It’s hard to see that happening in ﬁve minutes.” 
It could be sweat, but it hurt enough to be blood. She didn’t dare 
swat Sal’s hand away or acknowledge the pain even slightly. Instead 
she scratched the corner of her mouth and said, “I’ve punished myself 
over that, but that’s pretty near the most it could of been. I walked in 
there straight to the dairy section and picked up two packs of Armours 
which is high you know but I didn’t even look for the price. Some of 
them is cheaper but just as good. But I was hurrying so I didn’t look.” 
“You were hurrying?” 
23 P ARADISE  
“Oh, yes, m’am. He was ﬁt to be tied. Spam ain’t nothing for a 
working man to eat.” 
“And wieners are?” 
“I thought about chops. I thought about chops.” 
“Didn’t you know your husband was coming home for supper, 
Mrs. Albright? Doesn’t he come home for supper every day?” 
She’s a really nice person, Mavis thought. Polite. She didn’t look 
around the room or at the boys’ feet, or jump at the crashing noise 
from the rear of the house, followed by a toilet ﬂush. 
The sound of the photographer snapping his cases was loud when 
the toilet stopped. “Got it,” he said. “Real nice meeting you, m’am.” 
He leaned in to shake Mavis’ hand. His hair was the same color as the 
reporter’s. 
“Get enough of the Cadillac?” asked June. 
“Plenty.” He made an O with thumb and foreﬁnger. “You all be 
nice, hear?” He touched his hat and was gone. 
Sal left off squeezing her mother’s waist. She leaned forward and 
concentrated on swinging her foot, only occasionally hitting Mavis’ 
shin. 
From where they sat no one in the room could see the Cadillac 
parked in front of the house. But it had been seen for months by every -
body in the neighborhood and could now be seen by anybody in Mary -
land since the photographer had taken more shots of it than he had of 
them. Mint green. Lettuce green. Cool. But the color wouldn’t show 
in the newspaper. What would show would be the size, the ﬂashiness 
of the place where babies had died. Babies forever unseen now 
because the mother did not even have a snapshot of their trusting 
faces. 
Sal jumped up and screamed, “Ow! Look! A beetle!” and stomped 
on her mother’s foot. 
Mavis had said, “Yes, m’am. He come home for supper every day,” 
and wondered what that would be like: to have a husband who came 
home every day. For anything. After the reporter left, she wanted to go 
look at the damage Sal had done to her side, but Frank was still in the 
bathroom, asleep probably, and it wasn’t a good idea to bother him. 
She thought to clean the potato chip crumbs from the seams of the 
24 Mavis  
plastic covers, but where she wanted to be was in the Cadillac. It 
wasn’t hers; it was his, yet Mavis loved it maybe more than he did and 
lied to him about losing the second set of keys. It was what she talked 
about last as June left, saying, “It ain’t new, though. It’s three years old. 
A ’65.” If she could, she would have slept out there, in the back seat, 
snuggled in the place where the twins had been, the only ones who 
enjoyed her company and weren’t a trial. She couldn’t, of course. 
Frank told her she better not touch, let alone drive, the Cadillac as 
long as she lived. So she was as surprised as anybody when she stole it. 
“You all right?” Frank was already under the sheet, and Mavis woke 
with a start of terror, which dissolved quickly into familiar fright. 
“I’m okay.” She searched the darkness for a sign, trying to feel, 
smell his mood in advance. But he was a blank, just the way he had 
been at supper the evening of the newspaper interview. The perfect 
meat loaf (not too loose, not too tight—two eggs made the differ -
ence) must have pleased him. Either that or he had reached balance: 
enough in, enough at hand. In any case, he’d been easy, even playful, 
at the table, while the other children were downright bold. Sal had 
Frank’s old shaving razor unfolded by her plate and asked her father a 
series of questions, all starting with “Is it sharp enough to cu t . . . ?”  
And Frank would answer, “Cut anything from chin hair to gristle,” 
or “Cut the eyelashes off a bedbug,” eliciting peals of laughter from 
Sal. When Billy James spit Kool-Aid into Mavis’ plate, his father said, 
“Hand me that catsup, Frankie, and Billy you stop playing in your 
mother’s food, you hear?” 
She didn’t think it would take them long, and seeing how they 
were at supper, enjoying each other’s jokes and all, she knew Frank 
would let the children do it. The newspaper people would think of 
something catchy, and June, “the only lady journalist the Courier 
had,” would do the human interest. 
Mavis tried not to stiffen as Frank made settling-down noises on 
the mattress. Did he have his shorts on? If she knew that she would 
know whether he was looking to have sex, but she couldn’t ﬁnd out 
without touching him. As if to satisfy her curiosity, Frank snapped the 
25 P ARADISE  
waistband of his boxers. Mavis relaxed, permitted herself a sigh that 
she hoped sounded like a snore. The sheet was off before she could 
complete it. When he pulled her nightgown up, he threw it over her 
face, and she let that mercy be. She had misjudged. Again. He was 
going to do this ﬁrst and then the rest. The other children would be 
behind the door, snickering, Sal’s eyes as cold and unforgiving as they 
were when she was told of the accident. Before Frank came to bed, 
Mavis had been dreaming of something important she was supposed 
to do, but couldn’t remember what it was. Just as it came to her, Frank 
had asked her was she all right. Now she supposed she really was all 
right because the important thing she’d forgotten would never need 
doing anymore. 
Would it be quick like most always? or long, wandering, collapsing 
in wordless fatigue? 
It was neither. He didn’t penetrate—just rubbed himself to climax 
while chewing a clump of her hair through the nightgown that cov -
ered her face. She could have been a life-size Raggedy Ann. 
Afterwards he spoke to her in the dark. “I don’t know, Mave. I just 
don’t know.” 
Should she say, What? What you mean? What don’t you know? Or 
keep quiet? Mavis chose silence because suddenly she understood that 
he was talking not to her but to the other children, snickering behind 
the door. 
“Maybe,” he said. “Maybe we can ﬁx it. Maybe not. I just don’t 
know.” He let out a deep yawn, then, “Don’t see how, though.” 
It was, she knew, the signal—to Sal, to Frankie, to Billy James. 
The rest of the night she waited, not closing her eyes for a second. 
Frank’s sleep was sound and she would have slipped out of bed (as 
soon as he had not smothered or strangled her) and opened the door 
except for the breathing beyond it. She was sure Sal squatted there— 
ready to pounce or grab her legs. Her upper lip would be raised show -
ing eleven-year-old teeth too big for her snarling mouth. Dawn, Mavis 
thought, would be critical. The trap would be agreed upon but maybe 
not laid yet. Her sharpest concentration would be needed to locate it 
before it sprung. 
26 Mavis  
At the ﬁrst hint of gray light Mavis eased out of the bed. If Frank 
woke it was all over. Clutching a pair of red pedal pushers and a Daffy 
Duck sweatshirt, she made it to the bathroom. She took a soiled 
brassiere from the hamper and got dressed fast. No panties, and she 
couldn’t go back in the bedroom for her shoes. The big thing was to 
get past the other children’s room. The door stood open and, although 
there was no sound coming out, Mavis chilled at the thought of 
approaching it. Down the hall to the left was the little kitchen–dining 
room, the living room to the right. She would have to decide which 
way she was headed before she ran past that door. They would proba -
bly expect her to go straight to the kitchen as usual, so maybe she 
should shoot for the front door. Or maybe they counted on her chang -
ing a habit, and the trap was not in the kitchen at all. 
Suddenly she remembered her purse was in the living room, 
perched on the television cabinet, which, when the set broke, had 
become a catchall. And the spare keys were pinned under a tear in the 
purse’s lining. Holding her breath, eyes wide to the darkness, Mavis 
padded quickly past the other children’s open door. With her back 
exposed to that much danger, she felt feverish—sweaty and cold 
together. 
Not only was her purse where she remembered, Sal’s galoshes 
were lying at the front door. Mavis grabbed the purse, stuck her feet in 
her daughter’s yellow boots and escaped onto the front porch. She did 
not look toward the kitchen and never saw it again. 
Getting out of the house had been so intense, she was pulling the 
Cadillac away from the curb when she realized she had no idea of 
what to do next. She drove toward Peg’s; she didn’t know the woman 
all that well, but her tears at the funeral impressed Mavis. She had 
always wanted to know her better, but Frank found ways to prevent 
acquaintance from becoming friendship. 
The one streetlight seemed miles away and the sun reluctant to 
rise, so she had trouble ﬁnding Peg’s house. When, ﬁnally, she did, she 
parked across the street to wait for stronger skylight before knocking on 
the door. Peg’s house was dark, the shade of the picture window still 
down. Complete quiet. The wooden girl in the petunias, her face hid -
27 P ARADISE  
den by a fresh blue bonnet, tilted a watering can, a family of carved 
ducks lined at her heels. The lawn, edged and close-cut, looked like a 
carpet sample of expensive wool. Nothing moved, neither the tiny 
windmill nor the ivy surrounding it. At the side of the house, however, 
a rose of Sharon, taller than Peg’s roof and older, was shaking. Stirred 
by the air conditioner’s exhaust it danced, roughing blossoms and buds 
to the grass. Wild, it looked wild, and Mavis’ pulse raced with it. 
According to the Cadillac’s clock it wasn’t ﬁve-thirty yet. Mavis 
decided to drive around for a while and return at a respectable hour. 
Six maybe. But they would be up, too, by then and Frank would see 
that the Caddy was gone. He would call the police for sure. 
Mavis swung away from the curb, sad and frightened by how 
dumb she was. Not only was the whole neighborhood familiar with the 
car, a photograph of it would be in today’s paper. When Frank bought 
it and drove it home the men on the street slapped the hood and 
grinned, leaned in to sniff the interior, hit the horn and laughed. 
Laughed and laughed some more because its owner had to borrow a 
lawn mower every couple of weeks; because its owner had no screens 
in his windows and no working television; because two of his six porch 
posts had been painted white three months earlier, the rest still ﬂaking 
yellow; because its owner sometimes slept behind the wheel of the car 
he’d traded in—all night—in front of his own house. And the women, 
who saw Mavis driving the children to the White Castle wearing sun -
glasses on cloudy days, ﬂat-out stared before shaking their heads. As 
though they knew from the start that the Cadillac would someday be 
notorious. 
Creeping at twenty miles per hour, Mavis entered route 121, 
thankful for the shelter of darkness left. As she passed the County Hos -
pital, a silent ambulance glided out of the driveway. A green cross in a 
ﬁeld of white slid from brilliant emergency light into shadow. Fifteen 
times she had been a patient there—four times for childbirth. During 
the next-to-last admission, when the twins were due, Mavis’ mother 
came from New Jersey to help out. She kept house and minded 
the other children for three days. When the twins were delivered, she 
went back to Paterson—a three-hour drive, thought Mavis. She could 
28 Mavis  
be there before The Secret Storm, which she had missed all summer 
long. 
At a Fill ’n Go gas station, Mavis checked her wallet before she 
answered the attendant. Three ten-dollar bills were folded behind her 
driver’s license. 
“Ten,” she said. 
“Gallons or dollars, m’am?” 
“Gallons.” 
In the adjacent lot, Mavis noticed the window of a breakfast diner 
reﬂecting coral in the early light. 
“Is that there place open?” she shouted over highway truck roar. 
“Yes, m’am.” 
Tripping occasionally on gravel, she walked toward the diner. 
Inside, the waitress was eating crab cakes and grits behind the counter. 
She covered her plate with a cloth and touched the corners of her 
mouth before wishing Mavis a good morning and taking her order. 
When Mavis left, carrying a paper cup of coffee and two honey dips in 
a napkin, she caught the waitress’s broad smile in the Hires Root Beer 
mirror by the exit. The grin bothered her all the way back to the gas 
station until, stepping into the car, she saw her canary-yellow feet. 
Away from the pump, parked behind the diner, she put her break -
fast on the dashboard while rummaging in the glove compartment. 
She found an unopened pint of Early Times, another bottle with an 
inch or so of scotch whiskey, paper napkins, a teething ring, several 
rubber bands, a pair of dirty socks, a battery-dead ﬂashlight, a tube of 
lipstick, a Florida map, rolls of breath mints and a few trafﬁc tickets. 
She dropped the teething ring into her purse, twisted her hair into 
a sad little ponytail that stuck out from the rubber band like hen 
feathers, and smeared the stranger’s lipstick on her mouth. Then 
she sat back and sipped the coffee. Too nervous to ask for milk or 
sugar, she’d ordered it black and could not force herself to take a 
third swallow. The stranger’s lipstick smirked sloppily from the card -
board rim. 
The Cadillac drank ten gallons of gasoline every ninety miles. 
Mavis wondered whether to call her mother or simply arrive. The lat -
29 P ARADISE  
ter seemed smarter. Frank may have called his mother-in-law by now 
or might do so any minute. Better if her mother could say truthfully, “I 
don’t know where she is.” Paterson took ﬁve hours, not three, and she 
had four dollars and seventy-six cents when she saw its sign. The fuel 
gauge touched E. 
The streets looked narrower than she remembered, and the stores 
were different. The northern leaves were already starting to turn. Driv -
ing underneath them, in the dappled hall they made, she felt as 
though the pavement slid forward instead of retreating. The faster she 
traveled, the more road appeared ahead. 
The Cadillac shut down a block from her mother’s house, but 
Mavis managed to coast across the intersection and incline the auto -
mobile against the curb. 
It was too soon. Her mother wouldn’t be home from the preschool 
till the afternoon children had been picked up. The door key was no 
longer under the reindeer, so Mavis sat on the back porch and strug -
gled out of the yellow boots. Her feet looked as though they belonged 
to somebody else. 
Frank had already called at ﬁve-thirty a.m. when Mavis was staring 
at Peg’s rose of Sharon. Birdie Goodroe told Mavis she had hung up on 
him after telling him she couldn’t think what the hell he was talking 
about and who the hell did he think he was, dragging her out of her 
sleep? She was not pleased. Not then and not later when her daughter 
tapped on the kitchen window looking like a bat out of hell, which is 
what she said as soon as she opened the door. “Girl, you look like a bat 
out of hell what you doing up here in little kiddie boots?” 
“Ma, just let me in, okay?” 
Birdie Goodroe had barely enough calf liver for two. Mother and 
daughter ate in the kitchen, Mavis presentable now—washed, 
combed, aspirined and swimming a little in Birdie’s housedress. 
“Well, let me have it. Not that I need to be told.” 
Mavis wanted some more of the baby peas and tipped the bowl to 
see if any were left. 
“I could see this coming, you know. Anybody could,” Birdie con -
tinued. “Don’t need more’n a mosquito’s brain.” 
There were a few. A couple of tablespoons. Mavis scraped them 
30 Mavis  
onto her plate wondering if there was to be any dessert. Quite a bit of 
the fried potatoes were still in her mother’s plate. “You going to eat 
those, Ma?” 
Birdie pushed her plate toward Mavis. There was a tiny square of 
liver, too, and some onions. Mavis scraped it all onto her plate. 
“You still have children. Children need a mother. I know what 
you’ve been through, honey, but you do have other children.” 
The liver was a miracle. Her mother always got every particle of 
the tight membrane off. 
“Ma.” Mavis wiped her lips with a paper napkin. “Why couldn’t 
you make it to the funeral?” 
Birdie straightened. “You didn’t get the money order? And the 
ﬂowers?” 
“We got them.” 
“Then you know why. I had to choose—help bury them or pay for 
a trip. I couldn’t afford to do both. I told you all that. I asked you all 
straight out which thing would be the best, and you both said the 
money. Both of you said so, both.” 
“They’re going to kill me, Ma.” 
“Are you going to hold that over my head for the rest of my life? 
All I’ve done for you and those children?” 
“They already tried but I got away.” 
“You’re all I have, now your brothers gone and got themselves shot 
up like—” Birdie slapped the table. 
“They got no right to kill me.” 
“What?” 
“He’s making the other children do it.” 
“What? Do what? Speak up so I can hear what you saying.” 
“I’m saying they are going to kill me.” 
“They? Who? Frank? What they?” 
“All of them. The kids too.” 
“Kill you? Your children?” 
Mavis nodded. Birdie Goodroe widened her eyes ﬁrst, then looked 
into her lap as she held her forehead in the palm of her hand. 
They didn’t talk anymore for a while, but later, at the sink, Birdie 
asked, “Were the twins trying to kill you too?” 
31 P ARADISE  
Mavis stared at her mother. “No! Oh, no, Ma! Are you crazy? 
They’re babies!” 
“All right. All right. Just asking. It’s unusual, you know, to think lit -
tle children . . .”  
“Unusual? It’s—it’s evil! But they’ll do what he says. And now 
they’ll do anything. They already tried, Ma!” 
“Tried how? What did they do?” 
“Sal had a razor and they was laughing and watching me. Every 
minute watching me.” 
“What did Sal do with the razor?” 
“She had it next to her plate and she was looking at me. They all 
was.” 
Neither woman spoke about it again, because Birdie told Mavis 
she could stay if and only if she never talked that way again. That she 
wouldn’t tell Frank, if he called back, or anybody else that she was 
there, but if she said one more word about killing she would call him 
right away. 
In a week Mavis was on the road, but this time she had a plan. 
Days before she heard her mother talking low into the mouthpiece of 
the telephone, saying, “You better get up here fast and I mean pronto,” 
Mavis had walked around the house, while Birdie was at the Play-
Skool, thinking: money, aspirin, paint, underwear; money, aspirin, 
paint, underwear. She took all she could ﬁnd of the ﬁrst two, the 
checks in two brown government envelopes propped against the 
photograph of one of her killed-in-action brothers, and both bottles of 
Bayer. She took a pair of rhinestone clips from Birdie’s jewelry box and 
stole back the car keys her mother thought she had hidden so well; 
poured two gallons of lawn mower gasoline into the Cadillac’s tank 
and drove away for more. In Newark she found an Earl Scheib paint 
shop and waited two days in the Y dormitory until it was sprayed 
magenta. The twenty-nine dollars advertised turned out to be for a 
standard-size car only. Sixty-nine dollars is what they made her pay for 
the Cadillac. The underwear and thong sandals she bought at Wool-
worth’s. At a Goodwill she bought a light-blue pantsuit, drip dry, and a 
white cotton turtleneck. Just right, she thought, for California. Just 
right. 
32 Mavis  
With a crisp new Mobil map beside her on the seat, she sped out 
of Newark heading for route 70. As more and more of the East was 
behind her, the happier she became. Only once had she felt this kind 
of happiness. On the Rocket ride she took as a kid. When the rocket 
zoomed on the downward swing, the rush made her giddy with plea -
sure; when it slowed just before turning her upside down through the 
high arc of its circle, the thrill was intense but calm. She squealed with 
the other passengers, but inside was the stable excitement of facing 
danger while safely strapped in strong metal. Sal hated it; so did the 
boys when, later on, she took them to the amusement park. Now, in 
ﬂight to California, the memory of the Rocket ride and its rush were 
with her at will. 
According to the map the way was straight. All she had to do was 
ﬁnd 70, stay on it until Utah, make a left on down to Los Angeles. 
Later she remembered traveling like that—straight. One state, then 
the next, just as the map promised. When her funds dwindled to coins, 
she was forced to look for hitchhikers. But other than the ﬁrst and the 
last, she could not remember the order of the girls. Picking up girls was 
easiest. They were safe company, she hoped, and they helped with gas 
and food and sometimes invited her to a place where they could crash. 
They graced primary routes, intersections, ramps to bridges, the verges 
of gas stations and motels, in jeans belted low on the hips and ﬂared at 
the bottom. Flat hair swinging or hair picked out in Afros. The white 
ones were the friendliest; the colored girls slow to melt. But all of them 
told her about the world before California. Underneath the knowing 
talk, the bell-chime laughter, the pointed silences, the world they 
described was just like her own pre-California existence—sad, scary, 
all wrong. High schools were dumps, parents stupid, Johnson a creep, 
cops pigs, men rats, boys assholes. 
The ﬁrst girl was outside Zanesville. That’s where sitting in a road -
side diner, counting her money, the runaway appeared. Mavis had 
noticed her going into the ladies’ room, then, quite a bit later, coming 
out dressed in different clothes: a long skirt this time, and a ﬂowing 
blouse that touched her thighs. Outside in the parking lot, the girl ran 
to the Cadillac’s passenger window and asked for a lift. Smiling hap -
pily, she jerked open the door when Mavis nodded. The girl said her 
33 P ARADISE  
name—Sandra but call me Dusty—and talked for thirty-two miles. 
Not interested in anything about Mavis, Dusty ate two Mallomars and 
chattered, mostly about the owners of the six dog tags that hung from 
her neck. Boys in her high school class or whom she had known in 
junior high. She’d got two from when they dated; the rest she begged 
from their families—souvenirs. All dead or missing. 
Mavis agreed to drive through Columbus and drop Dusty at her 
girlfriend’s house. They arrived in a soft rain. Someone had done the 
last mowing of the season. Dusty’s hair matted in brown licks; the glo -
riﬁed scent of newly cut grass in rain, the clink of dog tags, half a 
Mallo. That was Mavis’ memory of her ﬁrst detour with a hitchhiker. 
Except for the last, the others were out of sequence. Was it in Colorado 
that she saw a man sitting on a bench under pines in a rest area? He ate 
slowly, very slowly while he read a newspaper. Or before? It was sunny, 
cold. Anyway somewhere around that place she picked up the girl who 
stole her rhinestone clips. But earlier—near Saint Louis, was it?—she 
opened the passenger door to two girls shivering on route 70. Wind 
beaten, their army jackets closed tight around their chins, leather 
clogs, thick gray socks—they wiped their noses while their hands were 
still pocketed. 
Not far, they said. A place just a few miles out, they said. The 
place, a sparkling green cemetery, was as peopled as a park. Lines of 
cars necklaced the entrance. Groups of people, solitary strollers, all 
patient in the wind, mixed with boys from a military school. The girls 
thanked Mavis and got out, running a little to join a set of graveside 
mourners. Mavis lingered, amazed by the unnatural brightness of the 
green. What she thought were military students turned out to be real 
soldiers—but young, so young, and as fresh-looking as the headstones 
they stood before. 
It must have been after that when Mavis picked up Bennie—the 
last one and the one she liked best and who stole her raincoat and Sal’s 
boots. Bennie was glad to know that, like her, Mavis was going all the 
way to L.A. She, Bennie, was heading for San Diego. Not a talker, 
small or big, Bennie sang. Songs of true love, false love, redemption; 
songs of unreasonable joy. Some drew tears, others were deliberately 
silly. Mavis sang along once in a while, but mostly she listened and in 
34 Mavis  
one hundred and seventy-two miles never got tired of hearing her. 
Mile after mile rolled by urged and eased by the gorgeous ache in Ben-
nie’s voice. 
She didn’t like to eat at highway stops. If they were there, because 
Mavis insisted on it, Bennie drank water while Mavis wolfed down 
cheese melts and fries. Twice Bennie directed them through towns, 
searching for colored neighborhoods, where they could eat “healthy,” 
she said. At those places Bennie ate slowly, steadily, with repeat orders, 
side dishes and always something to go. She was careful with her 
money but didn’t seem worried about it, and shared the cost at every 
gas pump. 
Mavis never learned what she planned to do or who meet in L.A. 
(well, San Diego). “To get it on,” was her single answer to Mavis’ 
inquiry. Nevertheless, somewhere between Topeka and Lawrence, 
Kansas, she disappeared along with Mavis’ clear plastic raincoat and 
Sal’s yellow boots. Odd, because Mavis’ ﬁve-dollar bill was still 
attached to the gearshift with a rubber band. They had ﬁnished the 
barbecue and potato salad in a tacky restaurant named Hickey’s. Ben-
nie’s “to go” order was wrapped and sitting on the table. “I’ll take care 
of this,” she said, nodding toward the check. “You go on to the toilet 
before we hit the road.” When Mavis came out, Bennie and her ribs-
to-go were gone. 
“How the hell I know?” was what the waitress answered. “She 
didn’t leave even a penny tip.” 
Mavis ﬁshed out a quarter and placed it on the counter. She 
waited a few minutes in the car before trying to ﬁnd her way back to 
sweet 70. 
The quiet Bennie left in the Cadillac was unbearable. Mavis kept 
the radio on, and if one of Bennie’s songs came on, she sang too, 
mourning the inferior rendition. 
Panic struck in an Esso station. 
Returning the rest room key, Mavis looked through the window. 
Beyond, under the ﬂuorescent lights sheltering the pump, Frank was 
leaning into the Cadillac window. Could he have grown that much 
hair in two weeks? And his clothes. Black leather jacket, shirt opened 
almost to his navel, gold chains. Mavis buckled and when the atten -
35 P ARADISE  
dant stared at her she tried to make it look as though she’d stumbled. 
There was nowhere to run. She rummaged the Colorado maps in the 
rack. She looked again. He was gone. Parked close by, she thought, 
waiting for her to emerge. 
I’ll scream, she told herself, pretend I don’t know him, ﬁght him, 
call the police. The car was no longer mint green, but oh God—the 
license plate was the same. She had the reg. Suppose he brought the 
title papers. Was there a bulletin out? She could not stand still and 
there was no retreat. Mavis went forward. Not running. Not tripping. 
Head down, searching her purse for a twenty-dollar bill. 
Back in the car, waiting for the attendant to collect the money, she 
examined her surroundings in the rear- and side-view windows. 
Nothing. She paid and turned on the ignition. Right then the black-
jacketed, open shirt torso appeared in the right-hand mirror. Gold 
links catching ﬂuorescent light. Hard as she tried to control it, the 
Cadillac lurched out of the gas lane. Scared now, she forgot what to 
look for. Junction what? Turn right to go south. No, west. Enter 70 at 
what? But this was east. Exit ramp goes where? 
An hour later she was traveling a road already driven twice before. 
Exiting as soon as possible, she found herself on a narrow bridge and a 
street lined with warehouses. Secondary routes, she decided, would be 
better anyway. Fewer police, fewer streetlights. Trembling at every traf -
ﬁc light, she made it out of town. She was on route 18 when night 
came, and drove on and on until there was nothing but fumes to fuel 
the engine. The Cadillac neither sighed nor coughed. It simply 
stopped in a well of darkness, headlights picking out thirty feet of 
tarmac. Mavis switched off the lights and locked the doors. A little 
courage, she whispered. Like the girls running from, running toward. 
If they could roam around, jump in cars, hitchhike to burials, search 
strange neighborhoods for food, make their own way alone or with 
only each other for protection, certainly she could wait in darkness for 
morning to come. She had done it all her adult life, was able to sleep 
best in daylight. Besides and after all, she was not a teenager; she was a 
twenty-seven-year-old mother o f... 
Early Times didn’t help. The tears wet her chin, crept down her 
neck anyway. What it did eventually was knock her out. 
36 Mavis  
Mavis woke felt-mouthed, ugly, unfocused, and knew she was rav -
enous because the sun, watermelon red, looked edible. The screaming 
blue horizon that surrounded her was minus invitation or reproach 
and supported by a billion miles of not one thing. 
There was no choice. She relieved herself as Dusty had taught 
her, got back in the car to wait for another one to pass by. Bennie was 
smart; she never left anywhere without a dripping box of food. Mavis 
felt her stupidity close in on her head like a dry sack. A grown woman 
who could not cross the country. Could not make a plan that accom -
modated more than twenty minutes. Had to be taught how to dry her -
self in the weeds. Too rattle-minded to open a car’s window so babies 
could breathe. She did not know now why she had run from the gold 
links coming toward her. Frank was right. From the very beginning he 
had been absolutely right about her: she was the dumbest bitch on the 
planet. 
During the wait, in which no car or truck or bus approached, she 
dozed, woke to awful thoughts, dozed again. Suddenly she sat up, wide 
awake, and decided not to starve. Would the road girls just sit there? 
Would Dusty? Bennie? Mavis looked closely at the surroundings. The 
billion miles of not one thing had trees in the distance. Was this grass 
or a crop of some kind? Every road went somewhere, didn’t it? Mavis 
collected her purse, looked for her raincoat and discovered it was 
gone. “Christ!” she shouted and slammed the door. 
The rest of the morning she stayed on the same road. When the 
sun was highest, she turned into a narrower one because it offered 
shade. Still tarmac, but not enough room for two automobiles to pass 
without using the shoulder. When the road ran out of trees, she saw 
ahead to the left a house. It looked small but close and it took a while 
for her to discover it was neither. She had to negotiate acres of corn to 
arrive. Either the house was backwards or it had no driveway. As she 
drew closer she saw it was stone—sandstone, maybe, but dark with age. 
At ﬁrst there seemed to be no windows, but then she made out the 
beginning of a porch and saw the reﬂection of huge windows on the 
ground ﬂoor. Circling to the right, she glimpsed a driveway leading 
not to the front door but around to the side. Mavis turned left. The 
grass near the porch was tended. Claws gripped the ﬁnials on either 
37 P ARADISE  
side of the stone steps. Mavis climbed the stairs and knocked on the 
door. No answer. She walked around to the driveway side and saw a 
woman sitting in a red wooden chair at the edge of a vegetable garden. 
“Excuse me,” Mavis called, her hands funneling around her 
mouth. 
The woman faced her, but Mavis couldn’t tell where she was look -
ing. She was wearing sunglasses. 
“Excuse me.” Mavis moved closer. No need to shout now. “I broke 
down a ways back. Can anybody help? Is there someplace I can call?” 
The woman stood up, gathering the hem of her apron in both 
hands, and came forward. She wore a yellow cotton dress with tiny 
white ﬂowers and fancy buttons under an apron of what looked like 
sailcloth. Her low-heeled shoes were unlaced. On her head a wide-
brimmed straw hat. The sun was beating hard; a hot wind kicked up, 
turning back the brim of her hat. 
“No telephone out here,” she said. “Come inside.” 
Mavis followed her into the kitchen where the woman dumped 
pecans from her apron into a box by the stove and removed her hat. 
Two Hiawatha braids trailed down her shoulders. She slid out of her 
shoes, propped open the door with a brick and took off her sunglasses. 
The kitchen was big, full of fragrances and a woman’s solitary mess. 
Her back turned to Mavis, she asked her, “You a drinking woman?” 
Mavis didn’t know if a drink was being offered or solicited. 
“No, I’m not.” 
“Lies not allowed in this place. In this place every true thing is 
okay.” 
Startled, Mavis breathed into her palm. “Oh. I drank some of my 
husband’s liquor a while back, but I’m not what you’d call a drinking 
woman. I was just, well, wrung out. Driving so long and then running 
out of gas.” 
The woman busied herself lighting the stove. Her braids fell 
forward. 
“I forgot to ask your name. Mine’s Mavis Albright.” 
“People call me Connie.” 
“I’d appreciate some coffee, Connie, if you got any.” 
38 Mavis  
Connie nodded without turning around. 
“You work here?” 
“I work here.” Connie lifted her braids from her chest and 
dropped them behind her shoulders. 
“Is any of the family here? Seem like I knocked for the longest 
time.” 
“No family. Just her upstairs. She couldn’t answer the door if she 
wanted to and she don’t want to.” 
“I’m headed out by California. You think you can help me get 
some gas back to my car? Show me the way out of here?” 
The woman sighed at the stove but didn’t reply. 
“Connie?” 
“I’m thinking.” 
Mavis looked around the kitchen that seemed to her as large as her 
junior high school cafeteria and that also had swinging wooden doors. 
She imagined rooms full of rooms beyond those doors. 
“You all ain’t scared out here by yourselves? Don’t seem like 
there’s nothing for miles outside.” 
Connie laughed. “Scary things not always outside. Most scary 
things is inside.” She turned from the stove with a bowl and placed it 
before Mavis, who looked in despair at the steaming potatoes, over 
which a pat of butter melted. The Early Times drunk turned her 
hunger into nausea but she said thank you and accepted the fork in 
Connie’s hand. Anyway, the smell of the coffee was promising. 
Connie sat down next to her. “Maybe I go with you,” she said. 
Mavis looked up. It was the ﬁrst time she saw the woman’s face 
without the sunglasses. Quickly she looked back at the food and poked 
the fork into the bowl. 
“What you say me and you go to California?” 
Mavis felt, but could not face, the woman’s smile. Had she washed 
her hands before warming up the potatoes? Her smell was walnuts, not 
pecans. “What about your job here?” Mavis forced herself to taste a 
tiny bit of potato. Salty. 
“It’s by the sea, California?” 
“Yeah. Right on the coast.” 
39 P ARADISE  
“Be nice to see water again.” Connie kept her eyes on Mavis’ face. 
“Wave after wave after wave. Big water. Blue, blue, blue, yes?” 
“That’s what they say. Sunny California. Beaches, orange s... ” 
“Maybe too sunny for me.” Connie got up abruptly and went to 
the stove. 
“Can’t be sunnier than here.” The butter, salt and pepper mashed 
into the potatoes wasn’t all that bad. Mavis was eating rapidly. “Go for 
miles and don’t see a speck of shade.” 
“True,” said Connie. She placed two cups of coffee and a pot of 
honey on the table. “Too much sunshine in the world. Vex me. Can’t 
take it no more.” 
A breeze swept through the kitchen door, displacing the food 
smell with a sweeter one. Mavis had thought she would gulp the coffee 
when it arrived, but the satisfaction of the hot, salty potatoes made her 
patient. Following Connie’s example she spooned honey into her cup, 
stirring slowly. 
“Did you think up anything about how I can get me some 
gasoline?” 
“Wait awhile. Today maybe, tomorrow maybe. People be out to 
buy.” 
“Buy? Buy what?” 
“Garden things. Things I cook up. Things they don’t want to grow 
themselves.” 
“And one of them can take me to get some gas?” 
“Sure.” 
“Suppose nobody comes?” 
“Always come. Somebody always come. Every day. This morning 
already I sold forty-eight ears of corn and a whole pound of peppers.” 
She patted her apron pocket. 
Blowing gently into her cup, Mavis went to the kitchen door and 
looked out. When she ﬁrst arrived she was so happy to ﬁnd someone at 
home she had not looked closely at the garden. Now, behind the red 
chair, she saw ﬂowers mixed in with or parallel to rows of vegetables. In 
some places staked plants grew in a circle, not a line, in high mounds 
of soil. Chickens clucked out of sight. A part of the garden she origi -
40 Mavis  
nally thought gone to weed became, on closer inspection, a patch of 
melons. An empire of corn beyond. 
“You didn’t do all that by yourself, did you?” Mavis gestured 
toward the garden. 
“Except the corn,” said Connie. 
“Wow.” 
Connie put the breakfast bowl in the sink. “You want to clean 
yourself up?” 
The rooms full of rooms Mavis imagined to be lying through the 
swinging doors had kept her from asking to go to a bathroom. Here 
in the kitchen she felt safe; the thought of leaving it disturbed her. 
“I’ll wait to see who comes by. Then I’ll try to get myself together. I 
know I look a sight.” She smiled, hoping the refusal did not signal her 
apprehension. 
“Suit yourself,” said Connie and, sunglasses in place, patted 
Mavis’ shoulder as she stepped into her splayed shoes and on out to 
the yard. 
Left alone Mavis expected the big kitchen to lose its comfort. It 
didn’t. In fact she had an outer-rim sensation that the kitchen was 
crowded with children—laughing? singing?—two of whom were 
Merle and Pearl. Squeezing her eyes shut to dissipate the impression 
only strengthened it. When she opened her eyes, Connie was there, 
dragging a thirty-two-quart basket over the ﬂoor. 
“Come on,” she said. “Make yourself useful.” 
Mavis frowned at the pecans and shook her head at the nutcrack -
ers, picks and bowls Connie was assembling. “No,” she said. “Think of 
something else I can do to help. Shelling that stuff would make me 
crazy.” 
“No it wouldn’t. Try it.” 
“Uh uh. Not me.” Mavis watched as she organized the tools. 
“Shouldn’t you put some newspaper down? Be easier to clean up.” 
“No newspapers in this house. No radio either. Any news we get 
have to be from somebody telling it face-to-face.” 
“Just as well,” Mavis said. “All the news these days is bad as can be. 
Can’t do nothing about it anyway.” 
41 P ARADISE  
“You give in too quick. Look at your nails. Strong, curved like a 
bird’s—perfect pecan hands. Fingernails like that take the meat out 
whole every time. Beautiful hands, yet you say you can’t. Make you 
crazy. Make me crazy to see good nails go to waste.” 
Later, watching her suddenly beautiful hands moving at the task, 
Mavis was reminded of her sixth-grade teacher opening a book: lifting 
the corner of the binding, stroking the edge to touch the bookmark, 
caressing the page, letting the tips of her ﬁngers trail down the lines of 
print. The melty-thigh feeling she got watching her. Now, working 
pecans, she tried to economize her gestures without sacriﬁcing their 
grace. Connie, having launched her into the chore, was gone, saying 
she had to “see about Mother.” Sitting at the table, smelling the plea -
sure the wind brought through the door, Mavis wondered how old 
Connie’s mother was. Judging by the age of her daughter, she would 
have to be in her nineties. Also, how long before a customer would 
come? Had anybody bothered the Cadillac yet? At whatever gas station 
she got to, would there be a map showing the way back to sweet 70, or 
even 287? She would go north then, to Denver, then scoot west. With 
luck she’d be on her way by suppertime. With no luck, she’d be ready 
to leave in the morning. She would be back on concrete, listening to 
the car radio that had got her through the silence Bennie left, hours of 
nonstop driving—two ﬁngers impatiently twirling for the better song, 
the nicer voice. Now the radio was across a ﬁeld, down one road, then 
another. Off. In the space where its sound ought to be wa s... nothing. 
Just an absence, which she did not think she could occupy properly 
without the framing bliss of the radio. From the table where she sat 
admiring her busy hands, the radio absence spread out. A quiet, secret 
ﬁre breathing itself and exhaling the sounds of its increase: the crack of 
shells, the tick of nut meat tossed in the bowl, cooking utensils in eter -
nal adjustment, insect whisper, the argue of long grass, the faraway 
cough of cornstalks. 
It was peaceful, but she wished Connie would return lest she start 
up again—imagining babies singing. Just as the length of the woman’s 
absence seemed much too long, Mavis heard a car crunching gravel. 
Then braking. A door slap. 
42 Mavis  
“Hey, old lady.” A woman’s voice, light, loose. 
Mavis turned and saw a dark-skinned woman, limber and moving 
quickly, mount the steps and halt when she didn’t see what she 
expected. 
“Oh, excuse me.”  
“That’s okay,” said Mavis. “She’s upstairs. Connie.”  
“I see.”  
Mavis thought the woman was looking very carefully at her  
clothes. 
“Oh, lovely,” she said, coming to the table. “Just lovely.” She stuck 
her ﬁngers into the bowl of pecans and gathered a few. Mavis expected 
her to eat some, but she let them fall back to the heap. “What’s 
Thanksgiving without pecan pie? Not a thing.” 
Neither one of them heard the bare feet plopping, and since the 
swinging doors had no sound, Connie’s entrance was like an appari -
tion. 
“There you are!” The black woman opened her arms. Connie 
entered them for a long swaying hug. “I scared this girl to death. Never 
saw a stranger inside here before.” 
“Our ﬁrst,” said Connie. “Mavis Albright, this is Soane Morgan.”  
“Hi, hon.”  
“Morgan. Mrs. Morgan.”  
Mavis’ face warmed, but she smiled anyway and said, “Sorry. Mrs.  
Morgan,” while taking note of the woman’s expensive oxford shoes, 
sheer stockings, wool cardigan and the cut of her dress: summer-
weight crepe, pale blue with a white collar. 
Soane opened a crocheted purse. “I brought some more,” she said, 
and held up a pair of aviator-style sunglasses. 
“Good. I got one pair left.” 
Soane glanced at Mavis. “She eats sunglasses.” 
“Not me. This house eats them.” Fitting the stems behind her 
ears, Connie tested the dark lenses at the doorway. She turned her face 
directly to the sun and the “Hah!” she shouted was full of deﬁance. 
“Somebody order shelled pecans, or is this your idea?” 
“My idea.” 
43 P ARADISE  
“Make a lot of pies.” 
“Make more than pie.” Connie rinsed the sunglasses under the 
sink tap and peeled away the sticker. 
“I don’t want to hear, so don’t tell me. I came for the you-know-
what.” 
Connie nodded. “Can you get this girl some gasoline for her auto -
mobile? Take her and bring her back?” She was drying and polishing 
the new glasses, checking for spots and lint from the towel. 
“Where is your car?” asked Soane. There was wonder in her voice, 
as though she doubted anyone in thongs, wrinkled slacks and a child’s 
dirty sweatshirt could have a car. 
“Route eighteen,” Mavis told her. “Took me hours to walk here, 
but in a ca r... ” 
Soane nodded. “Happy to. But I’ll have to get somebody else to 
drive you back. I would, but I’ve got too much to do. Both my boys due 
on furlough.” Proudly, she looked at Connie. “House’ll be full before I 
know it.” Then, “How’s Mother?” 
“Can’t last.” 
“You sure Demby or Middleton’s not a better idea?” 
Connie slipped the aviator glasses into her apron pocket and 
headed for the pantry. “She wouldn’t draw but one breath in a hospi -
tal. The second one would be her last.” 
The small pouch Connie placed on top of a basket of pecans could 
have been a grenade. Positioned on the seat of the Oldsmobile 
between Mavis and Soane Morgan, the cloth packet emanated ten -
sion. Soane kept touching it as though to remind herself that it was 
there. The easy talk in the kitchen had disappeared. Suddenly formal, 
Soane said very little, answered Mavis’ questions with the least infor -
mation and asked none of her own. 
“Connie’s nice, isn’t she?” 
Soane looked at her. “Yes. She is.” 
For twenty minutes they traveled, Soane cautious at every rise or 
turn of the road, however slight. She seemed to be on the lookout for 
something. They stopped at a one-pump gas station in the middle of 
44 Mavis  
nowhere and asked the man who limped to the window for ﬁve gallons 
to carry. There was an argument, peppered with long silences, about 
the ﬁve-gallon can. He wanted Mavis to pay for it; she said she would 
return it when she came back to ﬁll her tank. He doubted it. Finally 
they settled for a two-dollar deposit. Soane and Mavis drove away, 
turned into another road, heading east for what seemed like an hour. 
Pointing toward a fancy wooden sign, Soane said, “Here we are.” The 
sign read ruby pop . 360  on top and lodge 16 at the bottom. 
Mavis’ immediate impression of the little town was how still it was, 
as though no one lived there. Except for a feed store and a savings and 
loan bank, it had no recognizable business district. They drove down a 
wide street, past enormous lawns cut to dazzle in front of churches and 
pastel-colored houses. The air was scented. The trees young. Soane 
turned into a side street of ﬂower gardens wider than the houses and 
snowed with butterﬂies. 
The odor of the ﬁve-gallon can had been ﬁerce in Soane’s car. But in 
the boy’s truck, propped between Mavis’ feet, it was indistinguishable 
from the others. The gluey, oily, metally combination might have 
made her retch if he had not done voluntarily what Mavis had been 
unable to ask of Soane Morgan: turn on the radio. The disc jockey 
announced the tunes as though they were made by his family or best 
friends: King Solomon, Brother Otis, Dinah baby, Ike and Tina girl, 
Sister Dakota, the Temps. 
As they bounced along, Mavis, cheerful now, enjoyed the music 
and the shaved part in the boy’s hair. Although he was pleasanter than 
Soane, he didn’t have much more to say. They were several miles away 
from Ruby pop. 360 and listening to the seventh of Jet magazine’s top 
twenty when Mavis realized that, other than the gas station guy, she 
had not seen a single white. 
“Any white people in your town?” 
“Not to live, they ain’t. Come on business sometime.” 
When they glimpsed the mansion in the distance on the way to 
the Cadillac, he asked, “What’s it like in there?” 
“I only been in the kitchen,” Mavis answered. 
45 P ARADISE  
“Two old women in that big of a place. Don’t seem right.” 
The Cadillac was unmolested but so hot the boy licked his ﬁngers 
before and after he unscrewed the gas cap. And he was nice enough to 
start the engine for her and tell her to leave the doors open for a while 
before she got in. Mavis did not have to struggle to get him to accept 
money—Soane had been horriﬁed—and he drove off accompanying 
“Hey Jude” on his radio. 
Behind the wheel, cooling in the air-conditioned air, Mavis regret -
ted not having noticed the radio station’s number on the dashboard of 
the boy’s truck. She ﬁddled the dial uselessly as she drove the Cadillac 
back to Connie’s house. She parked, and the Cadillac, dark as bruised 
blood, stayed there for two years. 
It was already sunset when the boy started the engine. Also she had 
forgotten to ask him for directions. Also she couldn’t remember where 
the gas station with her two-dollar deposit was and didn’t want to 
search for it in the dark. Also Connie had stuffed and roasted a 
chicken. But her decision to spend the night was mostly because of 
Mother. 
The whiteness at the center was blinding. It took a moment for 
Mavis to see the shape articulated among the pillows and the bone-
white sheets, and she might have remained sightless longer had not an 
authoritative voice said, “Don’t stare, child.” 
Connie bent over the foot of the bed and reached under the sheet. 
With her right hand she raised Mother’s heels and with her left ﬂuffed 
the pillows underneath them. Muttering “Toenails like razors,” she 
resettled the feet gently. 
When her eyes grew accustomed to dark and light, Mavis saw a 
bed shape far too small for a sick woman—almost a child’s bed—and a 
variety of tables and chairs in the rim of black that surrounded it. Con -
nie selected something from one of the tables and leaned into the light 
that ringed the patient. Mavis, following her movements, watched her 
apply Vaseline to lips in a face paler than the white cloth wrapped 
around the sick woman’s head. 
“There must be something that tastes better than this,” said 
Mother, trailing the tip of her tongue over her oiled lips. 
“Food,” said Connie. “How about some of that?” 
46 Mavis  
“No.” 
“Bit of chicken?” 
“No. Who is this you brought in here? Why did you bring some -
body in here?” 
“I told you. Woman with a car need help.” 
“That was yesterday.” 
“No it wasn’t. This morning I told you.” 
“Well, hours ago, then, but who invited her into my privacy? Who 
did that?” 
“Guess. You, that’s who. Want your scalp massaged?” 
“Not now. What is your name, child?” 
Mavis whispered it from the dark she stood in. 
“Step closer. I can’t see anything unless it’s right up on me. Like 
living in an eggshell.” 
“Disregard her,” Connie told Mavis. “She sees everything in the 
universe.” Drawing a chair bedside, she sat down, took the woman’s 
hand and one by one stroked back the cuticles on each crooked ﬁnger. 
Mavis moved closer, into the circle of light, resting her hand on 
the metal foot of the bed. 
“Are you all right now? Is your automobile working?” 
“Yes, m’am. It’s ﬁne. Thank you.” 
“Where are your children?” 
Mavis could not speak. 
“There used to be a lot of children here. This was a school once. A 
beautiful school. For girls. Indian girls.” 
Mavis looked at Connie, but when she returned her glance, Mavis 
quickly lowered her eyes. 
The woman in the bed laughed lightly. “It’s hard, isn’t it,” she said, 
“looking in those eyes. When I brought her here they were green as 
grass.” 
“And yours was blue,” said Connie. 
“Still are.” 
“So you say.” 
“What color, then?” 
“Same as me—old-lady wash-out color.” 
“Hand me a mirror, child.” 
47 P ARADISE  
“Give her nothing.” 
“I’m still in charge here.” 
“Sure. Sure.” 
All three watched the brown ﬁngers gentling the white ones. The 
woman in the bed sighed. “Look at me. Can’t sit up by myself and 
arrogant to the end. God must be laughing His head off.” 
“God don’t laugh and He don’t play.” 
“Yes, well, you know all about Him, I’m sure. Next time you see 
Him, tell Him to let the girls in. They bunch around the door, but they 
don’t come in. I don’t mind in the daytime, but they worry my sleep at 
night. You’re feeding them properly? They’re always so hungry. 
There’s plenty, isn’t there? Not those frycake things they like but good 
hot food the winters are so bad we need coal a sin to burn trees on 
the prairie yesterday the snow sifted in under the door quaesumus, da 
propitius pacem in diebus nostris Sister Roberta is peeling the onions 
et a peccato simus semper liberi can’t you ab omni perturbatione 
secur i... ” 
Connie folded Mother’s hands on the sheet and stood, signaling 
Mavis to follow her. She closed the door and they stepped into the 
hall. 
“I thought she was your mother. I mean the way you talked, I 
thought she was your own mother.” They were descending the wide 
central stairs. 
“She is my mother. Your mother too. Whose mother you?” 
Mavis did not answer, partly because she couldn’t speak of it but 
also because she was trying to remember where, in a house with no 
electricity, the light in Mother’s room came from. 
After the roast chicken supper, Connie showed Mavis to a large 
bedroom. From the four cots in it, she chose the one closest to the win -
dow, where she knelt looking out. Two milky moons, instead of the 
one hanging there, would have been just like Connie’s eyes. Beneath 
them a swept world. Unjudgmental. Tidy. Ample. Forever. 
California, which way? 
Maryland, which way? 
Merle? Pearl? 
The lion cub that ate her up that night had blue eyes instead of 
48 Mavis  
brown, and he did not have to hold her down this time. When he cir -
cled her shoulders with his left paw, she willingly let her head fall 
back, clearing the way to her throat. Nor did she ﬁght herself out of the 
dream. The bite was juicy, but she slept through that as well as other 
things until the singing woke her. 
Mavis Albright left the Convent off and on, but she always 
returned, so she was there in 1976. 
On that July morning she had been aware for months of the sour -
ness between the Convent and the town and she might have antici -
pated the truckload of men prowling the mist. But she was thinking of 
other things: tattooed sailors and children bathing in emerald water. 
And exhausted by the pleasures of the night before, she let herself drift 
in and out of sleep. An hour later, shooing pullets out of the school -
room, she smelled cigar smoke and the merest trace of Aqua Velva. 
49 GRACE  Either the pavement was burning or she had sapphires hidden in 
her shoes. K.D., who had never seen a woman mince or switch 
like that, believed it was the walk that caused all the trouble. Neither 
he nor his friends lounging at the Oven saw her step off the bus, but 
when it pulled away there she was—across the street from them in 
pants so tight, heels so high, earrings so large they forgot to laugh at her 
hair. She crossed Central Avenue toward them, taking tiny steps on 
towering block heels not seen since 1949. 
She walked fast, as though tripping through red coals or else in 
pain from something stuck in the toes of her shoes. Something valu -
able, K.D. thought, otherwise she would have removed it. 
He carried the equipment box through the dining room. Narrow 
panels of lace spilled from a basket on the side table. Aunt Soane 
worked thread like a prisoner: daily, methodically, for free, producing 
more lace than could ever be practical. Out back the garden skirting to 
the left was weed-free and nicely tilled. K.D. turned right toward the 
shed and entered. The collies were thrilled to see him. He had to strad -
dle Good to keep her down. Her ears were soft in his ﬁngers and he 
was steady with the camphor-soaked cotton. The ticks came away like 
coffee grounds. He put his palm under her jaw; she licked his chin. 
Ben, the other collie, head on paws, looked on. Life at Steward Mor-
gan’s ranch loaded the dogs with mess. They needed a few days in 
Ruby under K.D.’s care twice a year. He took the bristle brush from the 
box. Dug deep in Good’s hair, brushing it smooth and singing, softly in 
a Motown falsetto, the song he’d made up for her when she was a 
53 P ARADISE  
puppy. “Hey good dog; stay good dog; old good dog; my good dog. 
Everybody needs a good good good dog. Everybody needs a good a 
good a good good dog.” 
Good stretched her pleasure. 
Just those concerned would be at the meeting tonight. Everybody, 
that is, except the one who started it all. His uncles Deek and Steward, 
Reverend Misner, Arnette’s father and brother. They would discuss 
the slapping but not the pregnancy and certainly not the girl with 
sapphires hidden in her shoes. 
Suppose she hadn’t been there. Suppose her navel had not peeked 
over the waist of her jeans or her breasts had just hushed, hushed for a 
few seconds till they could ﬁgure out how to act—what attitude to 
strike. In public, without girls hanging around, they would have 
known. As a group they would have assumed the right tone immedi -
ately. But Arnette was there, whining, and so was Billie Delia. 
K.D.  and Arnette had separated themselves from the others. To 
talk. They stood near the dwarf oaks behind the picnic benches and 
tables for a conversation worse than he ever thought talking could be. 
What Arnette said was, “Well, what are you going to do about it?” 
What she meant was: I’m going to Langston in September and I don’t 
want to be pregnant or to abort or get married or feel bad by myself or 
face my family. He said, “Well, what are you going to do about it?” 
thinking: You cornered me at more socials than I can remember and 
when I ﬁnally agreed I didn’t have to take your drawers down you beat 
me to it so this ain’t my problem. 
They had just begun to veil threats and unveil mutual dislike 
when the bus pulled away. All heads, all, turned. First because they 
had never seen a bus in the town—Ruby was not a stop on the way to 
someplace else. Second to see why it stopped at all. The vision that 
appeared when the bus drove away, standing on the road shoulder 
between the schoolhouse and Holy Redeemer, riveted the attention of 
everybody lounging at the Oven. She didn’t have on any lipstick but 
from one hundred and ﬁfty feet, you could see her eyes. The silence 
that descended seemed permanent until Arnette broke it. 
“If that’s the kind of tramp you want, hop to it, nigger.” 
K.D.  looked from Arnette’s neat shirtwaist dress to the bangs across 
54 Grace  
her forehead and then into her face—sullen, nagging, accusatory— 
and slapped it. The change in her expression well worth it. 
Somebody said, “Ow!” but mostly his friends were assessing the 
screaming tits closing in on them. Arnette ﬂed; Billie Delia too, but, 
like the good friend she was, looked back, to see them forcing them -
selves to look at the ground, the bright May sky or the length of their 
ﬁngernails. 
Good was ﬁnished. Her belly hair could stand a light clipping—its 
knots were otherwise impossible—but she was beautiful. K.D. started 
on Ben’s coat, rehearsing his line of defense to Arnette’s family. When 
he described the incident to his uncles they had frowned at the same 
time. And like a mirror image in gestures if not in looks, Steward spit 
fresh Blue Boy while Deek lit a cigar. However disgusted both were, 
K.D.  knew they would not negotiate a solution that would endanger
him or the future of Morgan money. His grandfather had named his 
twins Deacon and Steward for a reason. And their family had not built 
two towns, fought white law, Colored Creek, bandits and bad weather, 
to see ranches and houses and a bank with mortgages on a feed store, a 
drugstore and a furniture store end up in Arnold Fleetwood’s pocket. 
Since the loose bones of his cousins had been buried two years ago, 
K.D., their hope and their despair, was the last male in a line that 
included a lieutenant governor, a state auditor and two mayors. His 
behavior, as always, required scrutiny and serious correction. Or 
would the uncles see it another way? Maybe Arnette’s baby would be a 
boy, a Morgan grandnephew. Would her father, Arnold, have any 
rights then that the Morgans had to respect? 
Fondling Ben’s coat, picking burrs from the silky strands of hair, K.D. 
tried to think like his uncles—which was hard. So he stopped trying 
and slipped off into his dream of choice. Only this time it included 
Gigi and her screaming tits. 
“Hi.” She cracked her gum like a professional. “Is this Ruby? Bus 
driver said this was it.” 
“Yep. Yeah. Uh huh. Sure is.” The lounging boys spoke as one. 
“Any motels around?” 
55 P ARADISE  
They laughed at that and felt comfortable enough to ask her who 
she was looking for and from where she had come. 
“Frisco,” she said. “And rhubarb pie. Got a light?” 
The dream, then, would be in Frisco. 
The Morgan men conceded nothing but were uneasy at the choice of 
meeting place. Reverend Misner had thought it best to serve protocol 
and go to Fleetwood rather than season the raw insult done to the fam -
ily by making the aggrieved come to the house of the aggressor. 
K.D., Deek and Steward had sat in the parsonage living room all 
nods and conciliatory grunts, but K.D. knew what his uncles were 
thinking. He watched Steward shift tobacco and hold the juice. So far 
the credit union Misner had formed was no-proﬁt—small emergency 
loans to church members; no-penalty payback schedules. Like a piggy 
bank, Deek had said. But Steward said, Yeah for now. The reputa -
tion of the church Misner had left to come to Ruby ﬂoated behind 
him: covert meetings to stir folks up; confrontations with rather than 
end runs around white law. He obviously had hope for a state that had 
once decided to build a whole new law school to accommodate one 
student—a Negro girl—and protect segregation at the same time. He 
clearly took seriously the possibility of change in a state that had also 
built an open closet right next to a classroom for another Negro 
student to sit in by himself. That was in the forties, when K.D. was a 
nursing infant, before his mother, her brothers, his cousins, and all the 
rest left Haven. Now, some twenty years later, his uncles listened 
weekly to Misner’s sermons, but at the close of each of them they slid 
behind the steering wheel of their Oldsmobile and Impala and 
repeated the Old Fathers’ refrain: “Oklahoma is Indians, Negroes and 
God mixed. All the rest is fodder.” To their dismay, Reverend Misner 
often treated fodder like table food. A man like that could encourage 
strange behavior; side with a teenage girl; shift ground to Fleetwood. A 
man like that, willing to throw money away, could give customers 
ideas. Make them think there was a choice about interest rates. 
Still, the Baptists were the largest congregation in town as well as 
56 Grace  
the most powerful. So the Morgans sorted Reverend Misner’s opin -
ions carefully to judge which were recommendations easily ignored 
and which were orders they ought to obey. 
In two cars they drove barely three miles from Misner’s living 
room to Fleetwood’s house. 
Somewhere in an Oklahoma city, June voices are doubled by 
the sunlit water of a swimming pool. K.D. was there once. He had 
ridden the Missouri, Kansas, Texas line with his uncles and waited 
outside on the curb while they talked business inside a red-brick build -
ing. Excited voices sounded near, and he went to see. Behind a chain-
link fence bordered by wide seamless concrete he saw green water. He 
knows now it was average size, but then it ﬁlled his horizon. It seemed 
to him as though hundreds of white children were bobbing in it, their 
voices a cascade of the world’s purest happiness, a glee so sharply felt 
it had brought tears. Now, as the Oldsmobile U-turned at the Oven, 
where Gigi had popped her gum, K.D. felt again the yearning excite -
ment of sparkly water and the June voices of swimmers. His uncles 
had not been pleased at having to search the city’s business district for 
him and chastised him on the train and later in the automobile all the 
way back to Ruby. Small price then, and small price now. The erup -
tions of “How the hell you get in these messes? You should be with 
people your own age. Why you want to lay with a Fleetwood any -
how? You see that boy’s children? Damn!”—all of them exploded with -
out damage. Just as he had already seen the sparkly water, he had 
already seen Gigi. But unlike the swimming pool, this girl he would 
see again. 
They parked bumper-to-bumper to the side of Fleetwood’s house. 
When they knocked on the door each man, except for Reverend Mis -
ner, began to breathe through his mouth as a way of narrowing the 
house odor of illness. 
Arnold Fleetwood never wanted to sleep in a pup tent, on a pallet 
or a ﬂoor ever again. So he put four bedrooms in the spacious house he 
built on Central Avenue. Sleeping arrangements for himself, his wife 
and each of their two children left a guest room they were proud of. 
When his son, Jefferson, came back from Vietnam and took Sweetie, 
57 P ARADISE  
his bride, into his own bed, there was still the guest room. It would 
have become a nursery had they not needed it as a hospital ward for 
Jeff and Sweetie’s children. The way things turned out, Fleet now slept 
on a hideaway in the dining room. 
The men sat on spotless upholstery waiting for Reverend Misner 
to ﬁnish seeing the women who were nowhere in sight. Both of the 
Mrs. Fleetwoods spent all their energy, time and affection on the four 
children still alive—so far. Fleet and Jeff, grateful for but infuriated by 
that devotion, turned their shame sideways. Being in their company, 
sitting near them, was hard. Conversation harder. 
K.D.  knew that Fleet owed his uncles money. And he knew that 
Jeff wanted very much to kill somebody. Since he couldn’t kill the Vet -
erans Administration others just might have to do. Everybody was 
relieved when Misner came back down the stairs, smiling. 
“Yes. Well.” Reverend Misner clasped his hands, gave them a little 
shake near his shoulder as though he’d already knocked the contestant 
out. “The ladies promise to bring us coffee and I believe they said rice 
pudding later. That’s the best reason I know of to get started.” He 
smiled again. He was very close to being too handsome for a preacher. 
Not just his face and head, but his body, extremely well made, called 
up admiring attention from practically everybody. A serious man, he 
took his obvious beauty as a brake on sloth—it forced him to deal care -
fully with his congregation, to take nothing for granted: not the adora -
tion of the women or the envy of the men. 
No one returned his smile concerning dessert. He pressed on. 
“Let me lay out the situation as I know it. Correct me, you all, if I 
get it wrong or leave out something. My understanding is that K.D. 
here has done an injury, a serious injury, to Arnette. So right off we can 
say K.D. has a problem with his temper and an obligation—” 
“Ain’t he a little old to have his temper raised toward a young girl?” 
Jefferson Fleetwood, seething in a low chair farthest from the lamp -
light, interrupted. “I don’t call that temper. I call it illegal.” 
“Well, at that particular moment, he was way out of line.” 
“Beg your pardon, Reverend. Arnette is ﬁfteen.” Jeff looked 
steadily into K.D.’s eyes. 
58 Grace  
“That’s right,” said Fleet. “She ain’t been hit since she was two 
years old.” 
“That may be the problem.” Steward, known for inﬂammatory 
speech, had been cautioned by Deek to keep his mouth shut and let 
him, the subtle one, do the talking. Now his words blew Jeff out of his 
chair. 
“Don’t you come in my house dirt-mouthing my family!” 
“Your house?” Steward looked from Jeff to Arnold Fleetwood. 
“You heard me! Papa, I think we better call this meeting off before 
somebody gets hurt!” 
“You right,” said Fleet. “This is my child we talking about. My 
child!” 
Only Jeff was standing, but now Misner rose. “Gentlemen. 
Whoa!” He held up his hands and, towering over the seated men, put 
to good use his sermon-making voice. “We are men here; men of God. 
You going to put God’s work in the gutter?” 
K.D.  saw Steward struggling with the need to spit and stood up 
also. “Look here,” he said. “I’m sorry. I am. I’d take it back if I could.” 
“Done is done, friends.” Misner lowered his hands. 
K.D.  continued. “I respect your daughter—”  
“Since when?” Jeff asked him.  
“I always respected her. From when she was that high.” K.D. lev  -
eled his hand around his waist. “Ask anybody. Ask her girlfriend, Billie 
Delia. Billie Delia will tell you that.” 
The effect of the genius stroke was immediate. The Morgan 
uncles held in their smiles, while the Fleetwoods, father and son, bris -
tled. Billie Delia was the fastest girl in town and speeding up by the 
second. 
“This ain’t about no Billie Delia,” said Jeff. “This is about what 
you did to my baby sister.” 
“Wait a minute,” said Misner. “Maybe we could get a better ﬁx, 
K.D., if you could tell us why you did it. Why? What happened? Were 
you drinking? Did she aggravate you somehow?” He expected this 
forthright question to open up a space for honesty, where the men 
could stop playing bear and come to terms. The sudden quiet that 
59 P ARADISE  
followed surprised him. Steward and Deek both cleared their sinuses 
at the same time. Arnold Fleetwood stared at his shoes. Something, 
Misner guessed, was askew. In that awkward silence they could hear 
above their heads the light click of heels: the women pacing, servicing, 
fetching, feeding—whatever it took to save the children who could 
not save themselves. 
“We don’t care about why,” said Jeff. “What I want to know is what 
you going to do about it?” He shot his foreﬁnger into the chair arm on 
the word “do.” 
Deek leaned back and spread his thighs wider, as though to wel -
come territory that naturally belonged to him. “What you have in 
mind?” he asked. 
“First off, apologize,” said Fleet. 
“I just did,” said K.D. 
“Not to me. To her. To her!” 
“Yes, sir,” said K.D. “I will.” 
“All right,” Deek said. “That’s ﬁrst. What’s second?” 
Jeff answered. “You better never lay your hand on her again.” 
“I won’t lay a thing on her, sir.” 
“Is there a third?” asked Deek. 
“We need to know he means it,” said Fleet. “Some sign it’s meant.” 
“Sign?” Deek managed to look puzzled. 
“My sister’s reputation is messed up, ain’t it?” 
“Uh huh. I can see that.” 
“Nothing can ﬁx that, can it?” Jeff’s question combined deﬁance 
and inquiry. 
Deek leaned forward. “Well, I don’t know. Hear she’s going to col -
lege. That’ll put all this behind her. Maybe we can help out some.” 
Jeff grunted. “I don’t know about that.” He looked at his father. 
“What do you think, Papa? Would tha t . . . ?”  
“Have to ask her mother. She’s hit by this too, you know. Hit 
worse’n I am, maybe.” 
“Well,” said Deek, “whyn’t you talk it over with her, then? If she’s 
agreeable, stop by the bank. Tomorrow.” 
Fleet scratched his jaw. “Can’t make any promises. Mable is a 
mighty proud woman. Mighty proud.” 
60 Grace  
Deek nodded. “Got a reason to be, daughter going to college and 
all. We don’t want anything to stand in the way of that. Credit to the 
town.” 
“When that school start up, Fleet?” Steward cocked his head. 
“August, I believe.” 
“She be ready then?” 
“What do you mean?” 
“Well,” Steward answered. “August’s a long way off. This here is 
May. She might change her mind. Decide to stay on.” 
“I’m her father. I’ll arrange her mind.” 
“Right,” said Steward. 
“Settled then?” Deek asked. 
“Like I say. Have to talk to her mother.” 
“Of course.” 
“She’s the key. My wife’s the key.” 
Deek smiled outright for the ﬁrst time that evening. “Women 
always the key, God bless ’em.” 
Reverend Misner sighed as though breathable air were available 
again. “God’s love is in this house,” he said. “I feel it every time I come 
here. Every time.” He looked toward the ceiling while Jefferson Fleet-
wood stared at him with stricken eyes. “We treasure His strength but 
we mustn’t ignore His love. That’s what keeps us strong. Gentlemen. 
Brothers. Let us pray.” 
They bowed their heads and listened obediently to Misner’s beau -
tifully put words and the tippy-tap steps of women who were nowhere 
in sight. 
The next morning Reverend Misner was surprised by how well he had 
slept. The meeting with the Morgans and Fleetwoods the previous 
night had made him uneasy. There was a grizzly bear in Fleetwood’s 
living room—quiet, invisible, but making deft movement impossible. 
Upstairs he’d made the women laugh—well, Mable anyway. Sweetie 
smiled but clearly didn’t enjoy his banter. Her eye was ever on her chil -
dren. A slide. A lean. A suck of air—she bent over a crib and made 
quick, practiced adjustments. But her expression was mildly patroniz -
61 P ARADISE  
ing as if to say what could there be to amuse her and why would he 
try? She acquiesced when he asked her to join him in prayer. Bowed 
her head, closed her eyes, but when she faced him with a quiet 
“Amen,” he felt as though his relationship with the God he spoke to 
was vague or too new, while hers was superior, ancient and completely 
sealed. 
He had better luck with Mable Fleetwood, who was delighted 
enough with his visit to prolong their conversation unnecessarily. 
Downstairs the men he had assembled, after learning what had hap -
pened at the Oven, waited—as did the grizzly. 
Misner fought his pillow for a moment and convinced himself 
that the ending was satisfactory. Tempers banked, a resolution sur -
faced, peace declared. At least he hoped so. The Morgans always 
seemed to be having a second conversation—an unheard dialogue 
right next to the one they spoke aloud. They performed as one 
man, but something in Deek’s manner made Misner wonder if he 
wasn’t covering for his brother—propping him the way you would a 
slow-learning child. Arnold’s air of affront was coy: a formula every -
one expected but knew had no weight. Jefferson’s skin was thin as 
gauze. But it was K.D. who irritated Misner most. Too quick to please. 
An oily apology. A devious smile. Misner despised males who hit 
women—and a ﬁfteen-year-old? What did K.D. think he was doing? 
His relation to Deek and Steward protected him, of course, but it 
was hard to like a man who relied on that. Servile to his uncles; 
brutal with females. Then, later that evening, as Misner warmed up 
the fried steak and potatoes Anna Flood had brought him for his sup -
per, he had looked out of his window and seen K.D. speeding down 
Central in Steward’s Impala. Smiling—he’d bet on it—his devious 
smile. 
Such nagging thoughts he believed would keep him awake most 
of the night, but in the morning he woke as if from the sweetest of 
sleeps. Anna’s food, he supposed. Still, he wondered, what had K.D. 
been zooming to on the road out of town? 
... 
62 Grace  
A man and a woman fucking forever. When the light changes every 
four hours they do something new. At the desert’s edge they fuck to the 
sky tide of Arizona. Nothing can stop them. Nothing wants to. Moon -
light arches his back; sunlight warms her tongue. There is no way to 
miss or mistake them if you know where they are: right outside Tucson 
on I-3, in a town called Wish. Pass through it; take the ﬁrst left. Where 
the road ends and the serious desert begins, keep going. The tarantulas 
are poisonous but it is necessary to go on foot because no tires can 
manage the terrain. One hour, tops, you’ll see loving to beat the sky. 
Sometimes tender. Other times rough. But they never stop. Not for 
dust storms or heat hovering at 108 degrees. And if you are patient and 
catch them in one of the desert’s random rainfalls you will see the 
color of their bodies deepen. But they keep on doing it in the rare pure 
rain—the black couple of Wish, Arizona. 
Over and over Mikey told Gigi how they looked and how to ﬁnd 
them outside his hometown. They would have been, could have been, 
a tourist attraction, he said, except they embarrassed local people. 
A committee of concerned Methodists, organized to blow them up 
or disguise them with cement, got started, but it died after a few pre -
liminary investigations. The committee members said their objections 
were not antisex at all but antiperversion, since it was believed by 
some, who had looked very carefully, that the couple was two women 
making love in the dirt. Others, after an equally careful examination 
(close up and with binoculars), said no, they were two males—bold as 
Gomorrah. 
Mikey, however, had touched the body parts and knew for a fact 
one was a woman, the other a man. “So what?” he said. “They weren’t 
doing it on a highway, after all. You had to go way out of the way to ﬁnd 
them.” Mikey said the Methodists wanted to get rid of them but they 
wanted them to be there too. That even a bunch of repressed rednecks, 
too scared to have wet dreams, knew they needed the couple. Even if 
they never went near them, he said, they needed to know they were 
out there. At sunrise, he said, they turned copper and you knew they’d 
been at it all night. At noon they were silvery gray. Then afternoon 
blue, then evening black. Moving, moving, all the time moving. 
63 P ARADISE  
Gigi loved to hear him say that part: “Moving, moving, all the time 
moving.” 
When they got split up, Mikey got ninety days. Gigi was released 
from the emergency room with an Ace bandage on her wrist. Every -
thing happened so fast they had no time to plan where to meet. The 
court-appointed lawyer came out saying no bail, no probation. His 
client had to do the whole three months. After calculating the sen -
tence, minus the three weeks spent in jail, Gigi sent Mikey a message 
through the CA lawyer. The message was “Wish April ﬁfteenth.” 
“What?” asked the lawyer. 
“Just say it. ‘Wish April ﬁfteenth.’ ” 
What did Mikey say to her message? 
“ ‘Right on,’ ” he said. “ ‘Right on.’ ” 
There was no Mikey, there was no Wish, there was no I-3 and 
nobody was fucking in the desert. Everybody she spoke to in Tucson 
thought she was crazy. 
“Maybe the town I’m looking for is too small for a map,” she 
offered. 
“Then ask the troopers. No town so small they don’t know it.” 
“The rock formation is off the road. Looks like a couple making 
love.” 
“Well, I seen some lizards do it in the desert, miss.” 
“Cactus, mebbe?” 
“Now there’s a possibility.” 
They laughed themselves weak. 
After running her ﬁnger down columns in the telephone directory 
and ﬁnding no one in the area with Mikey’s last name, Rood, Gigi gave 
him up. Reluctantly. The eternal desert coupling, however, she held 
on to for dear and precious life. Underneath gripping dreams of social 
justice, of an honest people’s guard—more powerful than her memory 
of the boy spitting blood into his hands—the desert lovers broke her 
heart. Mikey did not invent them. He may have put them in the wrong 
place, but he had only summoned to the surface what she had known 
all her life existe d . . . som ewhere. Maybe Mexico, which is where she 
headed. 
64 Grace  
The dope was heavy, the men always ready, but ten days later she 
woke up crying. She called Alcorn, Mississippi, collect. 
“Bring your butt home, girl. World change enough to suit you? 
Everybody dead anyway. King, another one of them Kennedys, 
Medgar Evers, a nigger name of X, Lord I can’t think who all since you 
left not to speak of right here remember L.J. used to work down at the 
route two mall somebody walked in there broad daylight with a pistol 
shaped like nothing nobody ever seen befor e... ” 
Gigi let her head fall back on the plaster wall near the telephone. 
Outside the bodega a clerk swung a broom at some children. Girls. 
Without underwear. 
“I’m coming, Granddaddy. I’m heading home right now.” 
Most of the time she had both seats to herself. Space to spread out. 
Sleep. Read back issues of Ramparts rolled in her knapsack. When she 
boarded the Santa Fe, the train pulled out crowded with air force men 
in blue. Soon 4-H’ers crowded the cars. But when she transferred to 
the MKT, the cars were never full again. 
The man with the earring didn’t come looking for her. She sought 
him out. Just to talk to somebody who wasn’t encased in polyester and 
who looked like he might smoke something other than Chesterﬁelds. 
He was short, almost a dwarf, but his clothes were East Coast hip. 
His Afro was neat, not ragged, and he wore seeds of gold around his 
neck, one matching stud in his ear. 
They stood next to each other at the snack bar, which the atten -
dant insisted on calling the dining car. She ordered a Coke without ice 
and a brownie. He was paying for a large cup of ice only. 
“That ought to be free,” Gigi said to the man behind the counter. 
“He shouldn’t have to pay for the cup.” 
“Excuse me, m’am. I just follow rules.” 
“I ordered no ice. Did you deduct anything?” 
“Course not.” 
“Don’t trouble yourself,” the short man said. 
“I ain’t troubled,” Gigi told him, and then, to the counterman: 
65 P ARADISE  
“Listen, you. Give him the ice you weren’t going to charge me for, 
okay?” 
“Miss, do I have to call the conductor?” 
“If you don’t, I will. This is train robbery, all right—trains robbing 
people.” 
“It’s all right,” said the man. “Just a nickel.” 
“It’s the principle,” said Gigi. 
“A ﬁve-cent principle ain’t no principle at all. The man needs a 
nickel. Needs it real bad.” The short man smiled. 
“I don’t need nothing,” said the attendant. “It’s the rules.” 
“Have two,” said the man, and ﬂicked a second nickel into the 
saucer. 
Gigi glaring, the earring man smiling, they left the snack bar 
together. She sat down across the aisle from him to expand on the inci -
dent, while the man crunched ice. 
“Gigi.” She held out her hand. “You?”  
“Dice,” he said.  
“Like chopping small?”  
“Like pair of.”  
He touched her with a cool, cool hand and they made up stories  
for each other for miles. Gigi even got comfortable enough to ask him 
had he ever seen or heard tell of a rock formation that looked like a 
man and a woman making out. He laughed and said no, but that he 
once heard about a place where there was a lake in the middle of a 
wheat ﬁeld. And that near this lake two trees grew in each other’s arms. 
And if you squeezed in between them in just the right way, well, you 
would feel an ecstasy no human could invent or duplicate. “They say 
after that can’t nobody turn you down.” 
“Nobody turns me down now.”  
“Nobody? I mean no-o-body!”  
“Where is this place?”  
“Ruby. Ruby, Oklahoma. Way out in the middle of nowhere.”  
“You been there?”  
“Not yet. But I plan to check it out. Say they got the best rhubarb  
pie in the nation.” 
“I hate rhubarb.” 
66 Grace  
“Hate it? Girl, you ain’t lived. You ain’t lived at all.” 
“I’m going home. See my folks.” 
“Where’s home for you?” 
“Frisco. All my folks live in Frisco. I just talked to my grandfather. 
They’re waiting on me.” 
Dice nodded but said nothing. 
Gigi stuffed the brownie wrapper in her empty paper cup. I am not 
lost, she thought. Not lost at all. I can go see Granddaddy or go back to 
the Bay o r... 
The train slowed. Dice rose to collect his luggage from the over -
head rack. He was so short he had to stand on tiptoe. Gigi helped him 
and he didn’t seem to mind. 
“Well, I get off here. Nice talking with you.” 
“You too.” 
“Good luck. Watch out, now. Don’t get wet.” 
If the boys standing in front of a kind of barbecue grill had said, No, 
this is Alcorn, Mississippi, she probably would have believed them. 
Same haircuts, same stares, same loose hick smiles. What her grand -
daddy called “country’s country.” Some girls were there too, arguing, it 
seemed, with one of them. In any case, they weren’t much help, but 
she enjoyed the waves of raw horniness slapping her back as she 
walked off down the street. 
First dust, ﬁne as ﬂour, sifted into her eyes, her mouth. Then the 
wind wrecked her hair. Suddenly she was out of town. What the locals 
called Central Avenue just stopped, and Gigi was at Ruby’s edge at the 
same time she had reached its center. The wind, soundless, came from 
the ground rather than the sky. One minute her heels clicked, the next 
they were mute in swirling dirt. On either side of her, tall grass rolled 
like water. 
She had stopped ﬁve minutes ago in a so-called drugstore, bought 
cigarettes and learned that the boys at the barbecue grill were telling 
the truth: there was no motel. And if there was any pie it wasn’t served 
at a restaurant because there wasn’t one of those either. Other than the 
picnic benches at the barbecue thing, there was no public place to sit 
67 P ARADISE  
down. All around her were closed doors and shut windows where 
parted curtains were swiftly replaced. 
So much for Ruby, she thought. Mikey must have sent her that 
lying freak on the train. She just wanted to see. Not just the thing in 
the wheat ﬁeld, but whether there was anything at all the world had to 
say for itself (in rock, tree or water) that wasn’t body bags or little boys 
spitting blood into their hands so as not to ruin their shoes. So. Alcorn. 
She might as well start over in Alcorn, Mississippi. Sooner or later one 
of those trucks parked by the Seed and Feed store would have to start 
up and she would hitch the hell out of there. 
Holding on to her hair and squinting against the wind, Gigi con -
sidered walking back toward the feed store. Her backpack felt heavy in 
high heels and if she didn’t move, the wind might topple her. As sud -
denly as it had begun the wind quit; in its absence she heard an engine 
coming toward her. 
“You headed out to the Convent?” A man in a wide-brimmed hat 
opened the door of his van. 
Gigi tossed her backpack on the seat and climbed in. “Convent? 
You kidding? Anything but. Can you put me near a real bus stop or 
train station or something?” 
“You in luck. Take you right to the track.” 
“Great!” Gigi dug around in the pack between her knees. “Smells 
new.” 
“Brand-new. You all my ﬁrst trip.” 
“You all?” 
“Have to make a stop. Another passenger going to take a train ride 
too.” He smiled. “My name’s Roger. Roger Best.” 
“Gigi.” 
“But you free. The other one I charge,” he said, cutting his eyes 
away from the road. Pretending to examine the scenery through the 
passenger window, he looked at her navel ﬁrst, then further down, 
then up. 
Gigi pulled out a mirror and, as best she could, repaired the wind 
damage to her hair, thinking, Yeah. I’m free, all right. 
And she was. Just as Roger Best said, there was no charge to the liv -
ing, but the dead cost twenty-ﬁve dollars. 
68 Grace  
Every now and then the woman sitting on the porch steps lifted 
her aviator’s glasses to wipe her eyes. One braid from under her straw 
hat fell down her back. Roger leaned on his knee and spoke to her for 
what seemed to Gigi a long time, then they both went inside. When 
Roger came out, he was closing his wallet and frowning. 
“Ain’t no help out here. You may’s well wait inside. Going to take 
me a while to get the body down.” 
Gigi turned to look behind her but couldn’t see through the 
partition. 
“Jesus! Shit! This here’s a hearse?” 
“Sometimes. Sometimes it’s a ambulance. Today it’s a hearse.” He 
was all business now. No quick glances at her breasts. “Got to get it on 
board the MKT at eight-twenty p.m. And I got to be there not in time 
but on time.” 
Gigi was quick but clumsy stepping out of the van, now hearse, 
but she made it around the house, up the wide wooden stairs and 
through the front doors in no time at all. He had said “Convent,” 
so she thought sweet but stern women ﬂoating in sailboat hats above 
long black sleeves. But there was nobody, and the woman in the straw 
hat had disappeared. Gigi walked through a marble foyer into another 
one, twice the size. In the dimness she could see a hallway extend -
ing to the right and to the left. In front of her more wide stairs. Before 
she could decide which way to go, Roger was behind her carrying 
a metal something with wheels. He moved toward the stairs, mum -
bling, “Not a bit of help, not a bit.” Gigi turned right, rushing toward 
light coming from under a pair of swing doors. Inside was the long -
est table she had ever seen, in the biggest kitchen. She sat there, 
chewing her thumbnail, wondering just how bad could it be riding 
with a dead person? There was some herb in her pack. Not much 
but enough, she thought, to keep her from freaking. She reached 
out and pinched off a bit of crust from a pie sitting before her and 
noticed for the ﬁrst time the place was loaded with food, mostly 
untouched. Several cakes, more pies, potato salad, a ham, a large dish 
of baked beans. There must be nuns, she thought. Or maybe all this 
was from the funeral. Suddenly, like a legitimate mourner, she was 
ravenous. 
69 P ARADISE  
Gigi was gobbling, piling more food onto her plate even while she 
scooped from it, when the woman entered without her straw hat or her 
glasses and lay down on the stone-cold ﬂoor. 
Her mouth was full of baked beans and chocolate cake so Gigi 
could not speak. Outside Roger’s horn blasted. Gigi put her spoon 
down but held on to the cake as she walked over to where the woman 
lay. Squatting down, she wiped her mouth and said, “Can I help you?” 
The woman’s eyes were closed but she shook her head no. 
“Is it anybody else here I can call?” 
She opened her eyes then, and Gigi saw nothing—just a faint cir -
cle where the edge of the iris used to be. 
“Hey, girl. You coming?” Roger’s voice was puny and distant over 
the throb of his engine. “I got a train to meet. On time! I got to be on 
time!” 
Gigi leaned down closer, gazing into eyes with nothing to recom -
mend them. 
“I said is anybody else here?” 
“You,” she murmured. “You here.” Each word sailed toward Gigi 
on a wave of alcohol breath. 
“You hear me? I can’t wait all day!” Roger warned. 
Gigi waved her free hand across the woman’s face to make sure 
she was blind as well as drunk. 
“Stop that,” said the woman, whispering but annoyed. 
“Oh,” said Gigi, “I thought. Why don’t you let me get you a 
chair?” 
“I’m gone, hear? Gone!” Gigi heard the engine rev and the hearse 
shift from neutral into reverse. 
“I’m missing my ride. What you want me to do?” 
The woman turned over on her side and folded her hands under 
her cheek. “Be a darling. Just watch. I haven’t closed my eyes in seven -
teen days.” 
“Wouldn’t a bed do the trick?” 
“Be a darling. Be a darling. I don’t want to sleep when nobody 
there to watch.” 
“On the ﬂoor?” 
70 Grace  
But she was asleep. Breathing like a child. 
Gigi stood up and looked around the kitchen, slowly swallowing 
cake. At least there were no dead people here now. The sound of the 
hearse grew fainter and then slipped away. 
Fright, not triumph, spoke in every foot of the embezzler’s man -
sion. Shaped like a live cartridge, it curved to a deadly point at the 
north end where, originally, the living and dining rooms lay. He must 
have believed his persecutors would come from the north because all 
the ﬁrst-ﬂoor windows huddled in those two rooms. Like lookouts. The 
southern end contained signs of his desire in two rooms: an outsize 
kitchen and a room where he could play rich men’s games. Neither 
room had a view, but the kitchen had one of the mansion’s two 
entrances. A veranda curved from the north around the bullet’s tip, 
continued along its wall past the main entrance, and ended at the ﬂat 
end of the ammunition—its southern exposure. Except from the bed -
rooms no one in the house could see the sun rise, and there was no 
vantage point to see it set. The light, therefore, was always misleading. 
He must have planned to have a lot of good-time company in his 
fortress: eight bedrooms, two giant bathrooms, a cellar of storerooms 
that occupied as much space as the ﬁrst ﬂoor. And he wanted to amuse 
his guests so completely they would not think of leaving for days on 
end. His efforts to entertain were no more sophisticated or interesting 
than he was—mostly food, sex and toys. After two years of semi-covert 
construction, he managed one voluptuous party before he was 
arrested, just as he feared, by northern lawmen, one of whom attended 
his ﬁrst and only party. 
The four teaching sisters who moved into his house when it was 
offered for sale at a pittance diligently canceled the obvious echoes of 
his delight but could do nothing to hide his terror. The closed-off, 
protected “back,” the poised and watchful “tip,” an entrance door 
guarded by the remaining claws of some monstrous statuary, which the 
sisters had removed at once. A rickety, ill-hanging kitchen door the 
only vulnerability. 
Gigi, as high as possible on her limited supply, and roaming 
through the mansion while the drunken woman slept on the kitchen 
71 P ARADISE  
ﬂoor, immediately recognized the conversion of the dining room into 
a schoolroom; the living room into a chapel; and the game room alter -
ation to an ofﬁce—cue sticks and balls, but no pool table. Then she 
discovered the traces of the sisters’ failed industry. The female-torso 
candleholders in the candelabra hanging from the hall ceiling. The 
curls of hair winding through vines that once touched faces now 
chipped away. The nursing cherubim emerging from layers of paint in 
the foyer. The nipple-tipped doorknobs. Layabouts half naked in old -
timey clothes, drinking and fondling each other in prints stacked in 
closets. A Venus or two among several pieces of nude statuary beneath 
the cellar stairs. She even found the brass male genitalia that had been 
ripped from sinks and tubs, packed away in a chest of sawdust as if, 
however repelled by the hardware’s demands, the sisters valued never -
theless its metal. Gigi toyed with the ﬁxtures, turning the testicles 
designed to release water from the penis. She sucked the last bit of 
joint—Ming One—and laid the roach on one of the alabaster vaginas 
in the game room. She imagined men contentedly knocking their ci -
gars against those ashtrays. Or perhaps just resting them there, know -
ing without looking that the glowing tip was slowly building a delicate 
head. 
She avoided the bedrooms because she didn’t know which one 
had belonged to the dead person, but when she went to use one of the 
bathrooms, she saw that no toilet activity was not meant to be reﬂected 
in a mirror that reﬂected in another. Most, set ﬁrmly into wall tile, had 
been painted. Bending to examine the mermaids holding up the tub, 
she noticed a handle fastened to a slab of wood surrounded by ﬂoor 
tile. She was able to reach and lift the handle, but not able to budge it. 
Suddenly she was ﬁercely hungry again and returned to the 
kitchen, to eat and do as the woman had asked: be a darling and watch 
while she slept—like an antique tripper afraid to come down alone. 
She was ﬁnished with the macaroni, some ham and another slice of 
cake when the woman on the ﬂoor stirred and sat up. She held her 
face in both hands for a moment, then rubbed her eyes. 
“Feel better?” asked Gigi. 
She took a pair of sunglasses from an apron pocket and put them 
on. “No. But rested.” 
72 Grace  
“Well that is better.” 
The woman got up. “I suppose. Thank you—for staying.” 
“Sure. Hangover’s a bitch. I’m Gigi. Who died?” 
“A love,” said the woman. “I had two; she was the ﬁrst and the last.” 
“Aw, I’m sorry,” Gigi said. “Where’s he taking her? The dude in 
the hearse.” 
“Far. To a lake named for her. Superior. That’s how she wanted it.” 
“Who else lives here? You didn’t cook all this food, did you?” 
The woman ﬁlled a saucepan with water and shook her head. 
“What you gonna do now?” 
“Gigi Gigi Gigi Gigi Gigi. That’s what frogs sing. What did your 
mother name you?” 
“Her? She gave me her own name.” 
“Well?” 
“Grace.” 
“Grace. What could be better?” 
Nothing. Nothing at all. If ever there came a morning when 
mercy and simple good fortune took to their heels and ﬂed, grace 
alone might have to do. But from where would it come and how fast? 
In that holy hollow between sighting and following through, could 
grace slip through at all? 
It was the I-give woman serving up her breasts like two baked Alaskas 
on a platter that took all the kick out of looking in the boy’s eyes. Gigi 
watched him battle his stare and lose every time. He said his name 
was K.D. and tried hard to enjoy her face as much as her cleavage 
while he talked. It was a struggle she expected, rose to and took plea -
sure in—normally. But the picture she had wakened to an hour earlier 
spoiled it. 
Unwilling to sleep on the second ﬂoor where a person had just 
died, Gigi had chosen the leather sofa in the used-to-be-game-room 
ofﬁce. Windowless, dependent on no longer available electricity for 
light, the room encouraged her to sleep deeply and long. She missed 
the morning entirely and woke in the afternoon, in a darkness hardly 
less than she’d fallen asleep in. Hanging on the wall in front of her was 
73 P ARADISE  
the etching she had barely glanced at when poking around the day 
before. Now it loomed into her line of vision in the skinny light from 
the hall. A woman. On her knees. A knocked-down look, cast-up beg -
ging eyes, arms outstretched holding up her present on a platter to a 
lord. Gigi tiptoed over and leaned close to see who was the woman 
with the I-give-up face. “Saint Catherine of Siena” was engraved on a 
small plaque in the gilt frame. Gigi laughed—brass dicks hidden in a 
box; pudding tits exposed on a plate—but in fact it didn’t feel funny. So 
when the boy she had seen in town the day before parked his car near 
the kitchen door and blew his horn, her interest in him had an edge of 
annoyance. Propped in the doorway she ate jam-covered bread while 
she listened to him and watched the war waged in his eyes. 
His smile was lovely and his voice attractive. “Been riding around 
looking all over for you. Heard you was out here. Thought you might 
be still.” 
“Who told you that?” 
“A friend. Well, a friend of a friend.” 
“You mean that hearse dude?” 
“Uh huh. Said you changed your mind about getting to the train 
station.” 
“News sure travels fast out here, even if nothing else does.” 
“We get around. Wanna go for a ride? Go as fast as you want.” 
Gigi licked jam from her thumb and foreﬁnger. She looked to the 
left toward the garden and thought she saw in the distance a glint of 
metal or maybe a mirror reﬂecting light. As from a state trooper’s 
sunglasses. 
“Gimme a minute,” she said. “Change my clothes.” 
In the game room she put on a yellow skirt and a dark red top. 
Then she consulted her astrology chart before stufﬁng her belongings 
(and a few souvenirs) in her backpack which she slung into the car’s 
rear seat. 
“Hey,” said K.D. “We just going for a little ride.” 
“Yeah,” she answered, “but who knows? I might change my mind 
again.” 
They drove through mile after mile of sky-blue sky. Gigi had not 
74 Grace  
really looked at the scenery from the train windows or the bus. As far as 
she was concerned, there was nothing out there. But speeding along in 
the Impala was more like cruising on a DC-10, and the nothing turned 
out to be sky—unignorable, custom-made, designer sky. Not empty 
either but full of breath and all the eye was meant for. 
“That’s the shortest skirt I ever saw.” He smiled his lovely smile. 
“Minis,” said Gigi. “In the real world they’re called miniskirts.” 
“Don’t they make people stare at you?” 
“Stare. Drive for miles. Have car wrecks. Talk stupid.” 
“You must like it. Reckon that’s what they’re for, though.” 
“You explain your clothes; I’ll explain mine. Where’d you get 
those pants, for instance?” 
“What’s wrong with them?” 
“Nothing. Listen, you want to argue, take me back.” 
“No. No, I don’t want to argue; I just want t o . . . ride.”  
“Yeah? How fast?” 
“Told you. Fast as I can.” 
“How long?” 
“Long as you want.” 
“How far?” 
“All the way.” 
The desert couple was big, Mikey said. From any angle you 
looked, he said, they took up the sky, moving, moving. Liar, thought 
Gigi; not this sky. This here sky was bigger than everything, including 
a woman with her breasts on a tray. 
When Mavis pulled into the driveway, near the kitchen door, she 
slammed the brakes so hard her packages slid from the seat and fell 
beneath the dashboard. The ﬁgure sitting in the garden’s red chair was 
totally naked. She could not see the face under the hat’s brim but she 
knew it wore no sunglasses. A mere month she’d been away, and for 
three weeks of that time couldn’t wait to get back. Something must 
have happened, she thought. To Mother. To Connie. At the squeal of 
the brakes, the sunning ﬁgure did not move. Only when she slammed 
75 P ARADISE  
the Cadillac door did the person sit up and push back the hat. Calling 
out, “Connie! Connie?” Mavis hurried toward the garden’s edge. 
“Who the hell are you? Where’s Connie?” 
The naked girl yawned and scratched her pubic hair. “Mavis?” she 
asked. 
Relieved to learn she was known, spoken of, at least, Mavis low -
ered her voice. “What are you doing out here like that? Where’s 
Connie?” 
“Like what? She’s inside.”  
“You’re naked!”  
“Yeah. So? You want the cigar?”  
“Do they know?” Mavis glanced toward the house.  
“Lady,” said Gigi, “are you looking at something you never saw  
before or something you don’t have or you a clothes freak or what?” 
“There you are.” Connie came down the steps, her arms wide, 
toward Mavis. “I missed you.” They hugged and Mavis surrendered to 
the thump of the woman’s heart against her own. 
“Who is she, Connie, and where are her clothes?”  
“Oh, that’s little Grace. She came the day after Mother died.”  
“Died? When?”  
“Seven days now. Seven.”  
“But I brought the things. I have it all in the car.”  
“No use. Not for her anyway. My heart’s all scrunched, but now  
you back I feel like cooking.” 
“You haven’t been eating?” Mavis shot a cold glance at Gigi. 
“A bit. Funeral foods. But now I’ll cook fresh.” 
“There’s plenty,” said Gigi. “We haven’t even touched the—” 
“You put some clothes on!” 
“You kiss my ass!” 
“Do it, Grace,” said Connie. “Go, like a good girl. Cover yourself 
we love you just the same.” 
“She ever hear of sunbathing?” 
“Go on now.” 
Gigi went, exaggerating the switch of both the cheeks she had 
offered Mavis. 
“What rock did she crawl out from under?” Mavis asked. 
76 Grace  
“Hush,” said Connie. “Soon you’ll like her.” 
No way, Mavis thought. No way at all. Mother’s gone, but Con-
nie’s okay. I’ve been here almost three years, and this house is where 
we are. Us. Not her. 
They did everything but slap each other, and ﬁnally they did that. 
What postponed the inevitable were loves forlorn and a very young girl 
in too tight clothes tapping on the screen door. 
“You have to help me,” she said. “You have to. I’ve been raped and 
it’s almost August.” 
Only part of that was true. 
77 SENECA  Something was scratching on the pane. Again. Dovey turned over 
on her stomach, refusing to look out of the window each time she 
heard it. He wasn’t there. He never came at night. Deliberately she 
drove her mind onto everyday things. What would she ﬁx for supper 
tomorrow? 
Not much point to garden peas. May as well use canned. Not a 
taste bud in Steward’s mouth could tell the difference. Blue Boy 
packed in his cheek for twenty years ﬁrst narrowed his taste to a crav -
ing for spices, then reduced it altogether to a single demand for hot 
pepper. 
When they got married, Dovey was sure she could never cook well 
enough to suit the twin known to be pickier than his brother, Deek. 
Back from the war, both men were hungry for down-home food, but 
dreaming of it for three years had raised their expectations, exagger -
ated the possibilities of lard making biscuits lighter than snow, the 
responsibility sharp cheese took on in hominy. When they were dis -
charged and back home, Deek hummed with pleasure as he sucked 
sweet marrow from hocks or crunched chicken bones to powder. But 
Steward remembered everything differently. Shouldn’t the clove be 
down in the tissue, not just sitting on top of the ham? And the chicken-
fried steak—Vidalia onions or Spanish? 
On her wedding day, Dovey had stood facing the ﬂowered wall -
paper, her back to the window so her sister, Soane, could see better. 
Dovey held up the hem of her slip while Soane drew the seams. The 
little brush tickled the backs of her legs, but she stood perfectly still. 
81 P ARADISE  
There were no silk stockings in Haven or the world in 1949, but to get 
married obviously bare-legged mocked God and the ceremony. 
“I don’t expect he’ll be satisﬁed at table,” Dovey told her sister. 
“Why not?” 
“I don’t know. He compliments my cooking, then suggests how to 
improve it next time.” 
“Hold still, Dovey.” 
“Deek doesn’t do that to you, does he?” 
“Not that. He’s picky other ways. But I wouldn’t worry about it if I 
was you. If he’s satisﬁed in bed, the table won’t mean a thing.” 
They laughed then, and Soane had to do a whole seam over. 
Now the difﬁculty that loomed in 1949 had been solved by 
tobacco. It didn’t matter whether her peas were garden fresh or 
canned. Convent peppers, hot as hellﬁre, did all the cooking for her. 
The trouble it took to cultivate peas was wasted. A teaspoon of sugar 
and a plop of butter in canned ones would do nicely, since the bits of 
purple-black pepper he would sprinkle over them bombed away any 
quiet ﬂavor. Take late squash, for example. 
Almost always, these nights, when Dovey Morgan thought about 
her husband it was in terms of what he had lost. His sense of taste one 
example of the many she counted. Contrary to his (and all of Ruby’s) 
assessment, the more Steward acquired, the more visible his losses. 
The sale of his herd at 1958’s top dollar accompanied his defeat in the 
statewide election for church Secretary because of his outspoken con -
tempt for the schoolchildren sitting in in that drugstore in Oklahoma 
City. He had even written a hateful letter to the women who organized 
the students. His position had not surprised her, since ten years earlier 
he’d called Thurgood Marshall a “stir-up Negro” for handling the 
NAACP’s segregation suit in Norman. In 1962 the natural gas drilled 
to ten thousand feet on the ranch ﬁlled his pockets but shrunk their 
land to a toy ranch, and he lost the trees that had made it so beautiful 
to behold. His hairline and his taste buds faltered over time. Small 
losses that culminated with the big one: in 1964, when he was forty, 
Fairy’s curse came true: they learned neither could ever have children. 
Now, almost ten years later, he had “cleaned up,” as he put it, in a 
real estate deal in Muskogee, and Dovey didn’t have to wonder what 
82 Seneca  
else he would lose now because he was already in a losing battle with 
Reverend Misner over words attached to the lip of the Oven. An argu -
ment fueled in part, Dovey thought, by what nobody talked about: 
young people in trouble or acting up behind every door. Arnette, 
home from college, wouldn’t leave her bed. Harper Jury’s boy, Menus, 
drunk every weekend since he got back from Vietnam. Roger’s grand -
daughter, Billie Delia, disappeared into thin air. Jeff’s wife, Sweetie, 
laughing, laughing at jokes no one made. K.D.’s mess with that girl 
living out at the Convent. Not to speak of the sass, the pout, the out -
right deﬁance of some of the others—the ones who wanted to name 
the Oven “such-and-such place” and who had decided that the origi -
nal words on it were something that enraged Steward and Deek. 
Dovey had talked to her sister (and sister-in-law) about it; to Mable 
Fleetwood; to Anna Flood; to a couple of women in the Club. Opin -
ions were varied, confusing, even incoherent, because feelings ran 
so high over the matter. Also because some young people, by snicker -
ing at Miss Esther’s ﬁnger memory, had insulted entire generations 
preceding them. They had not suggested, politely, that Miss Esther 
may have been mistaken; they howled at the notion of remembering 
invisible words you couldn’t even read by tracing letters you couldn’t 
pronounce. 
“Did she see them?” asked the sons. 
“Better than that!” shouted the fathers. “She felt them, touched 
them, put her ﬁnger on them!” 
“If she was blind, sir, we could believe her. That’d be like braille. 
But some ﬁve-year-old kid who couldn’t read her own tombstone if she 
climbed out of her grave and stood in front of it?” 
The twins frowned. Fleet, thinking of his mother-in-law’s famous 
generosity, leapt out of the pew and had to be held back. 
The Methodists, early on, had smiled at the dissension among the 
Baptists. The Pentecostals laughed out loud. But not for long. Young 
members in their own churches began to voice opinions about the 
words. Each congregation had people who were among or related to 
the ﬁfteen families to leave Haven and start over. The Oven didn’t 
belong to any one denomination; it belonged to all, and all were asked 
to show up at Calvary. To discuss it, Reverend Misner said. The 
83 P ARADISE  
weather was cool, garden scents strong, and when they assembled at 
seven-thirty the atmosphere was pleasant, people simply curious. And 
it remained so right through Misner’s opening remarks. Maybe the 
young folks were nervous, but when they spoke, starting with Luther 
Beauchamp’s sons, Royal and Destry, their voices were so strident the 
women, embarrassed, looked down at their pocketbooks; shocked, the 
men forgot to blink. 
It would have been better for everyone if the young people had 
spoken softly, acknowledged their upbringing as they presented their 
views. But they didn’t want to discuss; they wanted to instruct. 
“No ex-slave would tell us to be scared all the time. To ‘beware’ 
God. To always be ducking and diving, trying to look out every minute 
in case He’s getting ready to throw something at us, keep us down.” 
“You say ‘sir’ when you speak to men,” said Sargeant Person. 
“Sorry, sir. But what kind of message is that? No ex-slave who had 
the guts to make his own way, build a town out of nothing, could think 
like that. No ex-slave—” 
Deacon Morgan cut him off. “That’s my grandfather you’re talk -
ing about. Quit calling him an ex-slave like that’s all he was. He was 
also an ex–lieutenant governor, an ex-banker, an ex-deacon and a 
whole lot of other exes, and he wasn’t making his own way; he was part 
of a whole group making their own way.” 
Having caught Reverend Misner’s eyes, the boy was ﬁrm. “He was 
born in slavery times, sir; he was a slave, wasn’t he?” 
“Everybody born in slavery time wasn’t a slave. Not the way you 
mean it.” 
“There’s just one way to mean it, sir,” said Destry. 
“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” 
“None of them do! Don’t know jackshit!” shouted Harper Jury. 
“Whoa, whoa!” Reverend Misner interrupted. “Brothers. Sisters. 
We called this meeting in God’s own house to try and ﬁnd—” 
“One of His houses,” snarled Sargeant. 
“All right, one of His houses. But whichever one, He demands 
respect from those who are in it. Am I right or am I right?” 
Harper sat down. “I apologize for the language. To Him,” he said, 
pointing upward. 
84 Seneca  
“That might please Him,” said Misner. “Might not. Don’t limit 
your respect to Him, Brother Jury. He cautions every which way 
against it.” 
“Reverend.” The Reverend Pulliam stood up. He was a dark, wiry 
man—white-haired and impressive. “We have a problem here. You, 
me. Everybody. The problem is with the way some of us talk. The 
grown-ups, of course, should use proper language. But the young 
people—what they say is more like backtalk than talk. What we’re here 
for is—” 
Royal Beauchamp actually interrupted him, the Reverend! “What 
is talk if it’s not ‘back’? You all just don’t want us to talk at all. Any talk 
is ‘backtalk’ if you don’t agree with what’s being said . . . . Sir.”  
Everybody was so stunned by the boy’s brazenness, they hardly 
heard what he said. 
Pulliam, dismissing the possibility that Roy’s parents—Luther and 
Helen Beauchamp—were there, turned slowly to Misner. “Reverend, 
can’t you keep that boy still?” 
“Why would I want to?” asked Misner. “We’re here not just to talk 
but to listen too.” 
The gasps were more felt than heard. 
Pulliam narrowed his eyes and was about to answer when Deek 
Morgan left the row and stood in the aisle. “Well, sir, I have listened, 
and I believe I have heard as much as I need to. Now, you all listen to 
me. Real close. Nobody, I mean nobody, is going to change the Oven 
or call it something strange. Nobody is going to mess with a thing our 
grandfathers built. They made each and every brick one at a time with 
their own hands.” Deek looked steadily at Roy. “They dug the clay— 
not you. They carried the hod—not you.” He turned his head to 
include Destry, Hurston and Caline Poole, Lorcas and Linda Sands. 
“They mixed the mortar—not a one of you. They made good strong 
brick for that oven when their own shelter was sticks and sod. You 
understand what I’m telling you? And we respected what they had 
gone through to do it. Nothing was handled more gently than the 
bricks those men—men, hear me? not slaves, ex or otherwise— 
the bricks those men made. Tell, them, Sargeant, how delicate was 
the separation, how careful we were, how we wrapped them, each 
85 P ARADISE  
and every one. Tell them, Fleet. You, Seawright, you, Harper, you tell 
him if I’m lying. Me and my brother lifted that iron. The two of us. 
And if some letters fell off, it wasn’t due to us because we packed it in 
straw like it was a mewing lamb. So understand me when I tell you 
nobody is going to come along some eighty years later claiming to 
know better what men who went through hell to learn knew. Act short 
with me all you want, you in long trouble if you think you can dis -
respect a row you never hoed.” 
Twenty varieties of “amen” italicized Deek’s pronouncement. 
The point he’d made would have closed off further argument if Misner 
had not said: 
“Seems to me, Deek, they are respecting it. It’s because they do 
know the Oven’s value that they want to give it new life.” 
The mutter unleashed by this second shift to the young people’s 
position rose to a roar, which subsided only to hear how the antago -
nists responded. 
“They don’t want to give it nothing. They want to kill it, change it 
into something they made up.” 
“It’s our history too, sir. Not just yours,” said Roy. 
“Then act like it. I just told you. That Oven already has a history. It 
doesn’t need you to ﬁx it.” 
“Wait now, Deek,” said Richard Misner. “Think what’s been said. 
Forget naming—naming the Oven. What’s at issue is clarifying the 
motto.” 
“Motto? Motto? We talking command!” Reverend Pulliam 
pointed an elegant ﬁnger at the ceiling. “ ‘Beware the Furrow of His 
Brow.’ That’s what it says clear as daylight. That’s not a suggestion; 
that’s an order!” 
“Well, no. It’s not clear as daylight,” said Misner. “It says ‘ . . . the  
Furrow of His Brow.’ There is no ‘Beware’ on it.” 
“You weren’t there! Esther was! And you weren’t here, either, at 
the beginning! Esther was!” Arnold Fleetwood’s right hand shook with 
warning. 
“She was a baby. She could have been mistaken,” said Misner. 
Now Fleet joined Deek in the aisle. “Esther never made a mistake 
of that nature in her life. She knew all there was to know about Haven 
86 Seneca  
and Ruby too. She visited us before we had a road. She named this 
town, dammit. ’Scuse me, ladies.” 
Destry, looking strained and close to tears, held up his hand and 
asked, “Excuse me, sir. What’s so wrong about ‘Be the Furrow’? ‘Be the 
Furrow of His Brow’?” 
“You can’t be God, boy.” Nathan DuPres spoke kindly as he shook 
his head. 
“It’s not being Him, sir; it’s being His instrument, His justice. As a 
race—” 
“God’s justice is His alone. How you going to be His instrument if 
you don’t do what He says?” asked Reverend Pulliam. “You have to 
obey Him.” 
“Yes, sir, but we are obeying Him,” said Destry. “If we follow His 
commandments, we’ll be His voice, His retribution. As a people—” 
Harper Jury silenced him. “It says ‘Beware.’ Not ‘Be.’ Beware 
means ‘Look out. The power is mine. Get used to it.’ ” 
“ ‘Be’ means you putting Him aside and you the power,” said 
Sargeant. 
“We are the power if we just—” 
“See what I mean? See what I mean? Listen to that! You hear that, 
Reverend? That boy needs a strap. Blasphemy!” 
As could have been predicted, Steward had the last word—or at least 
the words they all remembered as last because they broke the meeting 
up. “Listen here,” he said, his voice thick and shapely with Blue Boy. 
“If you, any one of you, ignore, change, take away, or add to the words 
in the mouth of that Oven, I will blow your head off just like you was a 
hood-eye snake.” 
Dovey Morgan, chilled by her husband’s threat, could only look 
at the ﬂoorboards and wonder what visible shape his loss would take 
now. 
Days later she still hadn’t made up her mind about who or which 
side was right. And in discussion with others, including Steward, she 
tended to agree with whomever she was listening to. This matter was 
one she would bring to her Friend—when he came back to her. 
87 P ARADISE  
... 
Driving away from the meeting at Calvary, Steward and Dovey had a 
small but familiar disagreement about where to go. He was headed out 
to the ranch. It was reduced to a show ranch now that gas rights had 
been sold, but in Steward’s mind it was home—where his American 
ﬂag ﬂew on holidays; where his honorable discharge papers were 
framed; where Ben and Good could be counted on to bang their tails 
maniacally when he appeared. But the little house they kept on St. 
Matthew Street—a foreclosure the twins never resold—was becoming 
more and more home to Dovey. It was close to her sister, to Mount 
Calvary, the Women’s Club. It was also where her Friend chose to pay 
his calls. 
“Drop me right here, Steward. I’ll walk the rest of the way.” 
“You going to catch your death.” 
“No I won’t. Night chill feels good right now.” 
“Girl, you a torment,” he said, but he patted her thigh before she 
got out. 
Dovey walked slowly down Central Avenue. In the distance she 
could see lanterns from the Juneteenth picnic hanging near the Oven. 
Four months now, and no one had taken them down to store for next 
year. Now they provided light—just a little, just enough—for other 
kinds of freedom celebrations going on in its shadows. On her left was 
the bank, not as tall as any of the churches but seeming nevertheless to 
hog the street. Neither brother had wanted a second ﬂoor like the 
Haven bank had, where the Lodge kept its quarters. They didn’t want 
trafﬁc into their building for any reason other than bank business. The 
Haven bank their father owned collapsed for a whole lot of reasons, 
and one of them, Steward maintained, was having Lodge meetings on 
the premises. “Ravels the concentration,” he’d said. Three streets 
beyond, on her right, next to Patricia Best’s house, was the school 
where Dovey had taught while the ranch house was being completed 
but Soane had taught longer since she lived so close. Pat ran the 
school by herself now, with Reverend Misner and Anna Flood ﬁlling 
in for Negro History classes and after-school typing lessons. The ﬂow -
88 Seneca  
ers and vegetables on one side of the school were an extension of the 
garden in front of Pat’s own house. 
Dovey turned left into St. Matthew Street. The moon’s light 
glittered white fences gone slant in an effort to hold back chrysanthe -
mums, foxglove, sunﬂowers, cosmos, daylilies, while mint and silver 
king pressed through the spaces at the bottom of the slats. The night 
sky, like a handsome lid, held the perfume down, saving it, intensifying 
it, refusing it the slightest breeze on which to escape. 
The garden battles—won, lost, still at bay—were mostly over. 
They had raged for ten years, having begun suddenly in 1963, when 
there was time. The women who were in their twenties when Ruby 
was founded, in 1950, watched for thirteen years an increase in bounty 
that had never entered their dreams. They bought soft toilet paper, 
used washcloths instead of rags, soap for the face alone or diapers 
only. In every Ruby household appliances pumped, hummed, sucked, 
purred, whispered and ﬂowed. And there was time: ﬁfteen minutes 
when no ﬁrewood needed tending in a kitchen stove; one whole hour 
when no sheets or overalls needed slapping or scrubbing on a wash -
board; ten minutes gained because no rug needed to be beaten, no 
curtains pinned on a stretcher; two hours because food lasted and 
therefore could be picked or purchased in greater quantity. Their hus -
bands and sons, tickled to death and no less proud than the women, 
translated a ﬁve-time markup, a price per pound, bale or live weight, 
into Kelvinators as well as John Deere; into Philco as well as Body by 
Fisher. The white porcelain layered over steel, the belts, valves and 
Bakelite parts gave them deep satisfaction. The humming, throbbing 
and softly purring gave the women time. 
The dirt yards, carefully swept and sprinkled in Haven, became 
lawns in Ruby until, ﬁnally, front yards were given over completely to 
ﬂowers for no good reason except there was time in which to do it. The 
habit, the interest in cultivating plants that could not be eaten, spread, 
and so did the ground surrendered to it. Exchanging, sharing a cutting 
here, a root there, a bulb or two became so frenetic a land grab, hus -
bands complained of neglect and the disappointingly small harvest of 
radishes, or the too short rows of collards, beets. The women kept on 
89 P ARADISE  
with their vegetable gardens in back, but little by little its produce 
became like the ﬂowers—driven by desire, not necessity. Iris, phlox, 
rose and peonies took up more and more time, quiet boasting and so 
much space new butterﬂies journeyed miles to brood in Ruby. Their 
chrysalises hung in secret under acacias, and from there they joined 
blues and sulphurs that had been feeding for decades in buckwheat 
and clover. The red bands drinking from sumac competed with the 
newly arrived creams and whites that loved jewel ﬂowers and nastur -
tiums. Giant orange wings covered in black lace hovered in pansies 
and violets. Like the years of garden rivalry, the butterﬂies were gone 
that cool October evening, but the consequence remained—fat, over -
wrought yards; clumps and chains of eggs. Hiding. Until spring. 
Touching the pickets lining the path, Dovey climbed the steps. 
There on the porch she hesitated and thought of turning back to call 
on Soane, who had left the meeting early. Soane worried her; seemed 
to have periods of frailty not related to the death of her sons ﬁve years 
ago. Maybe Soane felt what Dovey did—the weight of having two 
husbands, not one. Dovey paused, then changed her mind and 
opened the door. Or tried to. It was locked—again. Something 
Steward had recently begun that made her furious: bolting the house 
as though it were a bank too. Dovey was sure theirs was the only locked 
door in Ruby. What was he afraid of? She patted the dish under a pot 
of dracaena and picked up the skeleton key. 
Before that ﬁrst time, but never again, there was a sign. She had been 
upstairs, tidying the little foreclosed house, and paused to look 
through a bedroom window. Down below the leaf-heavy trees were 
immobile as a painting. July. Dry. One hundred one degrees. Still, 
opening the windows would freshen the room that had been empty for 
a year. It took her a moment—a tap here, a yank or two—but she 
managed ﬁnally to raise the window all the way up and lean forward to 
see what was left of the garden. From her position in the window the 
trees hid most of the backyard and she stretched a bit to see beyond 
their spread. Then a mighty hand dug deep into a giant sack and 
threw ﬁstfuls of petals into the air. Or so it seemed. Butterﬂies. A trem -
90 Seneca  
bling highway of persimmon-colored wings cut across the green tree -
tops forever—then vanished. 
Later, as she sat in a rocker under those trees, he came by. She 
had never seen him before and did not recognize any local family in 
his features. At ﬁrst she thought it was Menus, Harper’s son, who 
drank and who once had owned the house. But this man was walking 
straight and quickly, as though late for an appointment, using this 
yard as a shortcut to someplace else. Perhaps he heard the light cry of 
her rocker. Perhaps he wondered whether his trespass was safe. In 
any case, when he turned and saw her he smiled, raising a palm in 
greeting. 
“Afternoon,” she called. 
He changed his direction and came near to where she sat. 
“You from around here?” 
“Close,” he said, but he did not move his lips to say so. 
He needed a haircut. 
“I saw some butterﬂies a while back. Up there.” Dovey pointed. 
“Orangy red, they were. Just as bright. Never saw that color before. 
Like what we used to call coral when I was a girl. Pumpkin color, but 
stronger.” She wondered, at the time, what on earth she was talking 
about and would have stuttered to a polite close—something about the 
heat, probably, the relief evening would bring—except he looked so 
interested in what she was describing. His overalls were clean and 
freshly ironed. The sleeves of his white shirt were rolled above the 
elbows. His forearms, smoothly muscled, made her reconsider the 
impression she got from his face: that he was underfed. 
“You ever see butterﬂies like that?” 
He shook his head but evidently thought the question serious 
enough for him to sit on his heels before her. 
“Don’t let me keep you from where you’re going. It was just, well, 
my Lord, such a sight.” 
He smiled sympathetically and looked toward the place she had 
pointed to. Then he stood up, brushing the seat of his overalls, 
although he had not sat down in the grass, and said, “Is it all right if I 
pass through here?” 
“Of course. Anytime. Nobody lives here now. The man who 
91 P ARADISE  
owned it lost it. Nice, though, isn’t it? We’re thinking about maybe 
using it from time to time. My husband . . .” She was babbling, she 
knew, but he seemed to be listening earnestly, carefully to every word. 
At last she stopped—too ashamed of her silliness to go on—and 
repeated her invitation to use the shortcut whenever he wanted. 
He thanked her and left the yard, moving quickly between the 
trees. Dovey watched his ﬁgure melt in the shadow lace veiling the 
houses beyond. 
She never saw the persimmon wings again. He, however, did 
return. About a month later, then off and on every month or two. 
Dovey kept forgetting to ask Steward, or anybody else, who he might 
be. Young people were getting harder to identify and when friends or 
relatives visited Ruby, they did not always attend services, as people 
used to do, and get introduced to the congregation. She could not ask 
his age but supposed he was at least twenty years younger than she, and 
perhaps that alone made her keep his visits secret. 
Thing was, when he came, she talked nonsense. Things she didn’t 
know were on her mind. Pleasures, worries, things unrelated to the 
world’s serious issues. Yet he listened intently to whatever she said. By a 
divining she could not explain, she knew that once she asked him his 
name, he would never come again. 
Once, she fed him a slice of bread loaded with apple butter and 
he ate it all. 
More and more frequently she found reasons to remain on St. 
Matthew Street. Not hoping or looking for him, but content to know 
he had and would come by there—for a chat, a bite, cool water on a 
parched afternoon. Her only fear was that someone else would men -
tion him, appear in his company, or announce a prior claim to his 
friendship. No one did. He seemed hers alone. 
So on the evening of the argument with the young people at 
Mount Calvary, Dovey stuck the key in the lock of the foreclosed 
house, annoyed with Steward for making it necessary and agitated by 
the nasty turn the meeting had taken. She hoped to sit with a cup of 
hot tea, read some verses or a few psalms and collect her thoughts on 
the matter that was angering everybody, in case her Friend passed by in 
the morning. If he did, she would ask his opinion. But she had decided 
92 Seneca  
against tea or reading and, after saying her prayers, climbed into bed, 
where an unanswerable question blocked sleep: aside from giving up 
his wealth, can a rich man be a good one? She would ask her Friend 
about that too. 
Now, at least, at last, the backyard was lovely enough to receive 
him. At the ﬁrst visit it had been a mess, untended, trashy—home to 
cats, garden snakes, straying chickens—with only the coral-colored 
wings to recommend it. She had to ﬁx it up herself. K.D. balked and 
gave unimaginative excuses. And it was hard getting young people 
interested. Billie Delia used to be her helper, which was surprising 
since boys dominated her brain otherwise. But something was wrong 
there too. No one had seen her for some time and the girl’s mother, Pat 
Best, foreclosed all questions. Still angry, thought Dovey, at the town’s 
treatment of her father. Although Billie Delia was not at the meeting, 
her attitude was. Even as a little girl, with that odd rosy-tan skin 
and wayward brown hair, she pushed out her lips at everything— 
everything but gardening. Dovey missed her and wondered what 
Billie Delia thought of changing the Oven’s message. 
“Beware the Furrow of His Brow”? “Be the Furrow of His Brow”? 
Her own opinion was that “Furrow of His Brow” alone was enough for 
any age or generation. Specifying it, particularizing it, nailing its 
meaning down, was futile. The only nailing needing to be done had 
already taken place. On the Cross. Wasn’t that so? She’d ask her 
Friend. And then tell Soane. Meantime the scratching sound was 
gone and on the cusp of sleep she knew canned peas would do just 
ﬁne. 
Steward rolled down the window and spit. Carefully so the wind 
would not return it to his face. He was disgusted. “Cut me some slack.” 
That was the slogan those young simpletons really wanted to paint on 
the Oven. Like his nephew, K.D., they had no notion of what it took to 
build this town. What they were protected from. What humiliations 
they did not have to face. Driving, as always, as fast as the car would go 
once he was back on the county road heading for his ranch, Steward 
mulled over the difference between “Beware” and “Be” and how Big 
93 P ARADISE  
Papa would have explained it. Personally he didn’t give a damn. The 
point was not why it should or should not be changed, but what Rev -
erend Misner gained by instigating the idea. He spat again, thinking 
how much of a fool Misner turned out to be. Foolish and maybe even 
dangerous. He wondered if that generation—Misner’s and K.D.’s— 
would have to be sacriﬁced to get to the next one. The grand- and 
great-grandchildren who could be trained, honed as his own father 
and grandfather had done for Steward’s generation. No breaks there; 
no slack cut then. Expectations were high and met. Nobody took more 
responsibility for their behavior than those good men. He remem -
bered his brother’s, Elder Morgan’s, account of disembarking from 
Liverpool at a New Jersey port. Hoboken. In 1919. Taking a walk 
around New York City before catching his train, he saw two men argu -
ing with a woman. From her clothes, Elder said, he guessed she was a 
streetwalking woman, and registering contempt for her trade, he felt at 
ﬁrst a connection with the shouting men. Suddenly one of the men 
smashed the woman in her face with his ﬁst. She fell. Just as suddenly 
the scene slid from everyday color to black and white. Elder said his 
mouth went dry. The two whitemen turned away from the uncon -
scious Negro woman sprawled on the pavement. Before Elder could 
think, one of them changed his mind and came back to kick her in the 
stomach. Elder did not know he was running until he got there and 
pulled the man away. He had been running and ﬁghting for ten 
straight months, still unweaned from spontaneous violence. Elder hit 
the whiteman in the jaw and kept hitting until attacked by the second 
man. Nobody won. All were bruised. The woman was still lying on 
the pavement when a small crowd began yelling for the police. Fright -
ened, Elder ran and wore his army overcoat all the way back to Okla -
homa for fear an ofﬁcer would see the condition of his uniform. Later, 
when his wife, Susannah, cleaned, pressed and mended it, he told her 
to remove the stitches, to let the jacket pocket ﬂap, the shirt collar stay 
ripped, the buttons hang or remain missing. It was too late to save 
the bloodstains, so he tucked the bloody handkerchief into the pants 
pocket along with his two medals. He never got the sight of that white-
man’s ﬁst in that colored woman’s face out of his mind. Whatever he 
felt about her trade, he thought about her, prayed for her till the end of 
94 Seneca  
his life. Susannah put up a protracted argument, but the Morgan men 
won. Elder was buried as he demanded to be: in the uniform with its 
rips on display. He didn’t excuse himself for running, abandoning the 
woman, and didn’t expect God to cut him any slack for it. And he was 
prepared for Him to ask how it happened. Steward liked that story, but 
it unnerved him to know it was based on the defense of and prayers 
for a whore. He did not sympathize with the whitemen, but he could 
see their point, could even feel the adrenaline, imagining the ﬁst was 
his own. 
Steward parked and entered the house. He did not look forward to 
any bed without Dovey in it and tried again to think of an argument to 
keep her from staying in town so often. It would be futile; he could 
deny her nothing. He met the collies and took them along to see how 
well the hands had done their work. They were local men, whose 
wives and fathers he knew; who attended the same or a nearby church 
and who hated as he did the notion of “cut me some slack.” Again the 
bitterness rose. Had he any sons, they would have been sterling exam -
ples of rectitude, laughing at Misner’s notions of manhood: backtalk, 
name changes—as if word magic had anything to do with the courage 
it took to be a man. 
Steward leashed the dogs and unlatched the horse barn. His pref -
erence was to mount around four a.m. and ride Night till sunrise. He 
loved to roam the pastures, where everything was in the open. Saddled 
on Night, he rediscovered every time the fresh wonder of knowing that 
on one’s own land you could never be lost the way Big Papa and Big 
Daddy and all seventy-nine were after leaving Fairly, Oklahoma. On 
foot and completely lost, they were. And angry. But not afraid of any -
thing except the condition of the children’s feet. By and large they 
were healthy. But the pregnant women needed more and more rest. 
Drum Blackhorse’s wife, Celeste; his grandmother, Miss Mindy; and 
Beck, his own mother, were all with child. It was the shame of seeing 
one’s pregnant wife or sister or daughter refused shelter that had 
rocked them, and changed them for all time. The humiliation did 
more than rankle; it threatened to crack open their bones. 
Steward remembered every detail of the story his father and grand -
father told, and had no trouble imagining the shame for himself. 
95 P ARADISE  
Dovey, for instance, before each miscarriage, her hand resting on the 
small of her back, her eyes narrowed, looking inward, always inward at 
the baby inside her. How would he have felt if some highfalutin men 
in collars and good shoes had told her, “Get away from here,” and he, 
Steward, couldn’t do a thing about it? Even now, in 1973, riding his 
own land with free wind blowing Night’s mane, the thought of that 
level of helplessness made him want to shoot somebody. Seventy-nine. 
All their belongings strapped to their backs or riding on their heads. 
Young ones time-sharing shoes. Stopping only to relieve themselves, 
sleep and eat trash. Trash and boiled meal, trash and meal cake, trash 
and game, trash and dandelion greens. Dreaming of a roof, ﬁsh, rice, 
syrup. Raggedy as sauerkraut, they dreamed of clean clothes with 
buttons, shirts with both sleeves. They walked in a line: Drum and 
Thomas Blackhorse at the head, Big Papa, lame now, carried sitting up 
on a plank at the tail. After Fairly they didn’t know which way to go and 
didn’t want to meet anybody who might tell them or have something 
else in mind. They kept away from wagon trails, tried to stay closer to 
pinewoods and streambeds, heading northwest for no particular reason 
other than it seemed farthest away from Fairly. 
The third night Big Papa woke his son, Rector, and motioned for 
him to get up. Leaning heavily on two sticks, he moved a ways off from 
the campsite and whispered, “Follow me, you.” 
Rector went back for his hat and followed his father’s slow, painful 
steps. He thought, with alarm, that the old man was going to try to get 
to a town in the middle of the night, or apply to one of the farms where 
dark sod houses nestled up against a hillock. But Big Papa took him 
deeper into the piney wood where the odor of resin, lovely at ﬁrst, soon 
gave him a headache. The sky was brilliant with stars that dwarfed the 
crescent moon, turning it into a shed feather. Big Papa stopped and 
with groaning effort knelt down. 
“My Father,” he said. “Zechariah here.” Then, after a few seconds 
of total silence, he began to hum the sweetest, saddest sounds Rector 
ever heard. Rector joined Big Papa on his knees and stayed that way all 
night. He dared not touch the old man or interfere with his humming 
prayer, but he couldn’t keep up and sat back on his haunches to 
relieve the pain in his knees. After a while he sat all the way down, 
96 Seneca  
holding his hat in his hand, his head bowed, trying to listen, stay 
awake, understand. Finally he lay on his back and watched the star 
trail above the trees. The heartbreaking music swallowed him, and he 
felt himself ﬂoating inches aboveground. He swore later that he did 
not fall asleep. That during the whole night he listened and watched. 
Surrounded by pine trees, he felt rather than saw the sky fading at 
groundline. It was then he heard the footsteps—loud like a giant’s 
tread. Big Papa, who had not moved a muscle or paused in his song, 
was quickly silent. Rector sat up and looked around. The footsteps 
were thundering, but he couldn’t tell from which direction they came. 
As the hem of skylight widened, he could make out the silhouettes of 
tree trunks. 
They saw him at the same time. A small man, seemlike, too small 
for the sound of his steps. He was walking away from them. Dressed in 
a black suit, the jacket held over his shoulder with the foreﬁnger of his 
right hand. His shirt glistening white between broad suspenders. With -
out help of stick and with nary a groan, Big Papa stood up. Together 
they watched the man walking away from the palest part of the sky. 
Once, he lingered to turn around and look at them, but they could not 
see the features of his face. When he began walking again, they 
noticed he had a satchel in his left hand. 
“Run,” said Big Papa. “Gather the people.” 
“You can’t stay here by yourself,” said Rector. 
“Run!” 
And Rector did. 
When everyone was roused, Rector led them to where he and Big 
Papa had spent the night. They found him right there, standing 
straighter than the pines, his sticks tossed away, his back to the rising 
sun. No walking man was in sight, but the peace that washed 
Zechariah’s face spread to their own spirits, calming them. 
“He is with us,” said Zechariah. “He is leading the way.” 
From then on, the journey was purposeful, free of the slightest 
complaints. Every now and then the walking man reappeared: along a 
riverbed, at the crest of a hill, leaning against a rock formation. Only 
once did someone gather courage to ask Big Papa how long it might 
take. 
97 P ARADISE  
“This is God’s time,” he answered. “You can’t start it and you can’t 
stop it. And another thing: He’s not going to do your work for you, so 
step lively.” 
If the loud footsteps continued, they did not hear them. Nobody 
saw the walking man but Zechariah and sometimes a child. Rector 
never saw him again—until the end. Until twenty-nine days later. After 
being warned away by gunshot; offered food by some black women in 
a ﬁeld; robbed of their riﬂes by two cowboys—none of which disturbed 
their determined peace—Rector and his father both saw him. 
It was September by then. Any other travelers would be cautious 
going into Indian country with no destination and winter on the way. 
But if they were uneasy, it didn’t show. Rector was lying in tall grass, 
waiting for a crude trap to spring—rabbit, he hoped, groundhog, 
gopher, even—when just ahead, through a parting in the grass, he saw 
the walking man standing, looking around. Then the man squatted, 
opened his satchel and began rummaging in it. Rector watched for a 
while, then crawled backward through the grass before jumping up 
and running back to the campsite where Big Papa was ﬁnishing a cold 
breakfast. Rector described what he had seen and the two headed 
toward the place where the trap had been set. The walking man was 
still there, removing items from his satchel and putting others back. 
Even as they watched, the man began to fade. When he was com -
pletely dissolved, they heard the footsteps again, pounding in a direc -
tion they could not determine: in back, to the left, now to the right. Or 
was it overhead? Then, suddenly, it was quiet. Rector crept forward; 
Big Papa was crawling too, to see what the walker had left behind. 
Before they had gone three yards they heard a thrashing in the grass. 
There in the trap, bait and pull string undisturbed, was a guinea fowl. 
Male, with plumage to beat the band. Exchanging looks, they left it 
there and moved to the spot where they believed the walker had spread 
the items from his satchel. Not a thing in sight. Only a depression 
in the grass. Big Papa leaned down to touch it. Pressing his hand into 
the ﬂattened grass, he closed his eyes. 
“Here,” he said. “This is our place.” 
Well, it wasn’t, of course. Not yet anyway. It belonged to a family 
of State Indians, and it took a year and four months of negotiation, of 
98 Seneca  
labor for land, to ﬁnally have it free and clear. Coming from lush vege -
tation to extravagant space could have made them feel small when 
they saw more sky than earth, grass to their hips. To the Old Fathers it 
signaled luxury—an amplitude of soul and stature that was freedom 
without borders and without deep menacing woods where enemies 
could hide. Here freedom was not entertainment, like a carnival or a 
hoedown that you can count on once a year. Nor was it the table drop -
pings from the entitled. Here freedom was a test administered by the 
natural world that a man had to take for himself every day. And if he 
passed enough tests long enough, he was king. 
Maybe Zechariah never wanted to eat another stick-roasted rab -
bit, or cold buffalo meat. Maybe, having been routed from ofﬁce by 
whites, refused a homestead by coloreds, he wanted to make a perma -
nent feature in that open land so different from Louisiana. Anyway, 
while they set up temporary quarters—lean-tos, dugouts—and hauled 
wood in a wagon with two horses the State Indians lent them, 
Zechariah corralled some of the men into building a cook oven. They 
were proud that none of their women had ever worked in a white-
man’s kitchen or nursed a white child. Although ﬁeld labor was harder 
and carried no status, they believed the rape of women who worked in 
white kitchens was if not a certainty a distinct possibility—neither of 
which they could bear to contemplate. So they exchanged that danger 
for the relative safety of brutal work. It was that thinking that made a 
community “kitchen” so agreeable. They were extraordinary. They 
had served, picked, plowed and traded in Louisiana since 1755, when 
it included Mississippi; and when it was divided into states they had 
helped govern both from 1868 to 1875, after which they had been 
reduced to ﬁeld labor. They had kept the issue of their loins fruitful for 
more than two hundred years. They had denied each other nothing, 
bowed to no one, knelt only to their Maker. Now, remembering their 
lives and works, Steward was steadied, his resolve cemented. Imagine, 
he thought, what Big Papa or Drum Blackhorse or Juvenal DuPres 
would think of those puppies who wanted to alter words of beaten iron. 
The sun wasn’t due to rise for some time and Steward couldn’t 
ride that long anymore. So he urged Night around and headed toward 
home, thinking up another thing he would say, or do, to keep Dovey 
99 P ARADISE  
from spending nights in town. Sleep without the fragrance of her hair 
next to him was impossible. 
At the same moment, before morning light, Soane was standing in the 
kitchen of the biggest house in Ruby, whispering to the darkness out -
side the window. 
“Look out, quail. Deek’s gunning for you. And when he comes 
back he’ll throw a sackful of you on my clean ﬂoor and say something 
like: ‘This ought to take care of supper.’ Proud. Like he’s giving me a 
present. Like you were already plucked, cleaned and cooked.” 
Because the kitchen was ﬂooded with newly installed ﬂuorescent 
light, Soane could not see into the darkness outside as she waited for 
the kettle to boil. She wanted to get her tonic properly steeped before 
her husband returned. One of Connie’s preparations lay at her ﬁnger -
tips, a tiny cloth bag folded into a waxed paper packet. Its contents rep -
resenting the second time Connie had saved her. The ﬁrst time was a 
terrible mistake. No, not a mistake, a sin. 
She thought it was midnight when Deek eased out of bed and 
dressed in hunting clothes. But when he crept downstairs in sock feet, 
she’d looked at the clock glow: 3:30. Two hours more of sleep, she 
thought, but it was six a.m. when she woke, and she had to hurry. 
Get breakfast, lay out his business clothes. Before that, however, her 
tonic—very much needed now, because the air was thinning again. It 
had started thinning out, as if from too much wear, not when Scout 
was killed but two weeks later—even before Scout’s body had been 
shipped—when they were informed that Easter was dead too. Babies. 
One nineteen, the other twenty-one. How proud and happy she was 
when they enlisted; she had actively encouraged them to do so. Their 
father had served in the forties. Uncles too. Jeff Fleetwood was back 
from Vietnam none the worse. And although he did seem a little shook 
up, Menus Jury got back alive. Like a fool she believed her sons would 
be safe. Safer than anywhere in Oklahoma outside Ruby. Safer in the 
army than in Chicago, where Easter wanted to go. Safer than Birming -
ham, than Montgomery, Selma, than Watts. Safer than Money, Missis -
sippi, in 1955 and Jackson, Mississippi, in 1963. Safer than Newark, 
100 Seneca  
Detroit, Washington, D.C. She had thought war was safer than any 
city in the United States. Now she had four unopened letters mailed in 
1968 and delivered to the Demby post ofﬁce four days after she buried 
the last of her sons. She had never been able to open them. Both had 
been home on furlough that Thanksgiving, 1968. Seven months after 
King’s murder, and Soane had sobbed like the redeemed to see both 
her boys alive. Her sweet colored boys unshot, unlynched, unmo -
lested, unimprisoned. “Prayer works!” she shouted when they piled 
out of the car. It was the last time she had seen them whole. Connie 
had sold her shelled pecans enough for two Thanksgiving pies. A girl 
with a broke-down car was out there that day, and although Soane 
drove her to buy the gasoline she needed to go where she was headed, 
the girl had stayed on. Still, she must have gone off somewhere before 
the Mother died, otherwise Connie would not have needed to light a 
ﬁre in the ﬁelds. Nobody would have known except for the plume of 
black smoke. Anna Flood saw it, drove out and got the news. 
Soane had to hurry then too. Speak to Roger, go to the bank to 
telephone strangers up north, collect food from neighbor women and 
cook some things herself. She, Dovey and Anna carried it out there, 
knowing full well there was no one to eat it but themselves. Hurry, 
hurry, then too, because the body had to be shipped quickly up north. 
In ice. Connie seemed strange, broken somehow and Soane added her 
to the list of people who worried her life. K.D., for example. And 
Arnette. And Sweetie. And now the Oven site was on her mind. A few 
young men had taken to congregating there with 3.2 beer, people said, 
and the small children who liked to play there had been told to go 
home. Or so their mothers said. Then a few girls (who Soane thought 
needed slapping) found reason to be there. The way Arnette and Billie 
Delia used to. 
Folks said these young men needed something to do. But Soane, 
knowing there was so much to do, didn’t believe that was it. Some -
thing was going on. Something besides the ﬁst, jet black with red 
ﬁngernails, painted on the back wall of the Oven. Nobody claimed 
responsibility—but more shocking than collective denial was the 
refusal to remove it. The loungers said no, they hadn’t put it there, and 
no, they wouldn’t take it off. Although Kate Golightly and Anna 
101 P ARADISE  
Flood, with Brillo, paint thinner and a bucket of hot soapy water, even -
tually got it off, ﬁve days passed, during which the town leaders in a hot 
rage forbade anyone but the loungers to erase it. The clenched ﬁngers, 
red-tipped and thrust sideways, not up, hurt more than a blow and 
lasted longer. It produced a nagging, hateful pain that Kate’s and 
Anna’s scrubbing could not erase. Soane couldn’t understand it. 
There were no whites (moral or malevolent) around to agitate or 
incense them, make them ugly-up the Oven and defy the adults. In 
fact local citizens were prospering, had been on a roll for more than 
a decade: good dollars for beef, for wheat, gas rights sold, oil fueling 
purchases and backing speculation. But during the war, while Ruby 
thrived, anger smallpoxed other places. Evil Times, said Reverend 
Pulliam from New Zion’s pulpit. Last Days, said Pastor Cary at Holy 
Redeemer. Nothing was said at Calvary right away because that con -
gregation was still waiting for the new preacher, who, when he did 
come in 1970, said Good News: “I will vanquish thine enemies before 
thine eyes,” saith the Lord, Lord, Lord. 
That was three years ago. This was 1973. Her little girl—was it?— 
would be nineteen years old now if Soane had not gone to the Con -
vent for the help sin always needed. Shortly afterwards standing at the 
clothesline, struggling with the wind to pin sheets, Soane had looked 
up to see a lady in the yard smiling. She wore a brown wool gown and 
a white linen old-timey bonnet and carried a peck basket. When the 
lady waved, Soane returned the stranger’s greeting as best she could 
with a mouthful of clothespins—a nod she hoped was polite. The lady 
turned and moved on. Soane noticed two things: the basket was empty 
but the lady carried it with two hands as though it were full, which, as 
she knew now, was a sign of what was to come—an emptiness that 
would weigh her down, an absence too heavy to carry. And she knew 
who sent the lady to tell her so. 
Steam hiss interrupted her menu of regret and Soane poured hot 
water into a cup over the little muslin bag. She placed a saucer over 
the cup and let the medicine steep. 
Maybe they ought to go back to the way they did things when her 
babies were new. When everybody was too busy building, stocking, 
102 Seneca  
harvesting to quarrel or think up devilment. The way it was before 
Mount Calvary was completed. When baptisms were held in sweet 
water. Beautiful baptisms. Baptisms to break the heart, full of major 
chords and weeping and the thrill of being safe at last. When the pastor 
held the girls in his arms, lowering them one by one into newly hal -
lowed water, never letting go. Breathless, the others watched. Breath -
less, the girls rose, each in her turn. Their wet, white robes billow in 
sunlit water. Hair and face streaming they looked to heaven before 
bowing their heads for the command: “Go, now.” Then the reassur -
ance: “Daughter, thou art saved.” The softest note, when it hit sancti -
ﬁed water, doubled, trebled itself; then other notes from other throats 
came and traveled along with the ﬁrst. Tree birds hushed and tried to 
learn. Slowly, then, hand in hand, heads on supporting shoulders, the 
blessed and saved waded to the banks and made their way to the Oven. 
To dry, embrace, congratulate one another. 
Now Calvary had an inside pool; New Zion and Holy Redeemer 
had special vessels for dribbling a little water on an upright head. 
Minus the baptisms the Oven had no real value. What was needed 
back in Haven’s early days had never been needed in Ruby. The trucks 
they came in brought cookstoves as well. The meat they ate clucked 
in the yard, or fell on its knees under a hammer, or squealed through 
a slice in its throat. Unlike at Haven’s beginning, when Ruby was 
founded hunting game was a game. The women nodded when the 
men took the Oven apart, packed, moved and reassembled it. But pri -
vately they resented the truck space given over to it—rather than a few 
more sacks of seed, rather than shoats or even a child’s crib. Resented 
also the hours spent putting it back together—hours that could have 
been spent getting the privy door on sooner. If the plaque was so 
important—and judging from the part of the meeting she had wit -
nessed, she supposed it was—why hadn’t they just taken it by itself, left 
the bricks where they had stood for ﬁfty years? 
Oh, how the men loved putting it back together; how proud it had 
made them, how devoted. A good thing, she thought, as far as it went, 
but it went too far. A utility became a shrine (cautioned against not 
only in scary Deuteronomy but in lovely Corinthians II as well) and, 
103 P ARADISE  
like anything that offended Him, destroyed its own self. Nobody better 
to make the point than the wayward young who turned it into a differ -
ent kind of oven. One where the warming ﬂesh was human. 
When Royal and the other two, Destry and one of Pious DuPres’ 
daughters, asked for a meeting, it was quickly agreed upon. No one 
had called a town meeting in years. Everybody, including Soane and 
Dovey, thought the young people would ﬁrst apologize for their behav -
ior and then pledge to clean up and maintain the site. Instead they 
came with a plan of their own. A plan that completed what the ﬁst had 
begun. Royal, called Roy, took the ﬂoor and, without notes, gave a 
speech perfect in every way but intelligibility. Nobody knew what he 
was talking about and the parts that could be understood were plumb 
foolish. He said they were way out-of-date; that things had changed 
everywhere but in Ruby. He wanted to give the Oven a name, to have 
meetings there to talk about how handsome they were while giving 
themselves ugly names. Like not American. Like African. All Soane 
knew about Africa was the seventy-ﬁve cents she gave to the missionary 
society collection. She had the same level of interest in Africans as 
they had in her: none. But Roy talked about them like they were 
neighbors or, worse, family. And he talked about white people as 
though he had just discovered them and seemed to think what he’d 
learned was news. 
Yet there was something more and else in his speech. Not so 
much what could be agreed or disagreed with, but a kind of winged 
accusation. Against whites, yes, but also against them—the towns -
people listening, their own parents, grandparents, the Ruby grownfolk. 
As though there was a new and more manly way to deal with whites. 
Not the Blackhorse or Morgan way, but some African-type thing full of 
new words, new color combinations and new haircuts. Suggesting that 
outsmarting whites was craven. That they had to be told, rejected, con -
fronted. Because the old way was slow, limited to just a few, and weak. 
This last accusation swole Deek’s neck and, on a weekday, had him 
blowing out the brains of quail to keep his own from exploding. 
He would be pulling in with a bag of them any minute now, and 
later on Soane would serve up a platter of their tender, browned 
halves. So she contemplated rice or sweet potatoes as the contents of 
104 Seneca  
her cup steeped. When she swallowed the last drop, the back door 
opened. 
“What’s that?” 
She liked the smell of him. Windy-wet and grassy. “Nothing.” 
Deek tossed his sack on the ﬂoor. “Give me some of it, then.” 
“Go on, Deek. How many?” 
“Twelve. Gave six to Sargeant.” Deek sat down and before taking 
off his jacket unlaced his boots. “Enough to take care of two suppers.” 
“K.D. go with you?” 
“No. Why?” He grunted with the effort of debooting. 
Soane picked up the boots and put them on the back porch. “He’s 
hard to ﬁnd these days. Up to something, I bet.” 
“You put coffee on? Like what?” 
Soane sniffed the dark air, testing its weight, before closing the 
door. “Can’t tell, exactly. But he has too many reasons for wearing thin 
shoes.” 
“Chasing tail, I expect. ’Member that gal dragged herself in town 
some time back and was staying out to that Convent?” 
Soane turned to him, coffee tin at her breast as she eased off the 
lid. “Why you say ‘dragged’? Why you have to say ‘dragged’ like that? 
You see her?” 
“No, but other folks did.”  
“And?”  
Deek yawned. “And nothing. Coffee, baby. Coffee, coffee.”  
“So don’t say ‘dragged.’ ”  
“Okay, okay. She didn’t drag in.” Deek laughed, dropping his  
outer clothes on the ﬂoor. “She ﬂoated in.” 
“What’s wrong with the closet, Deek?” Soane looked at the water -
proof pants, the black and red jacket, the ﬂannel shirt. “And what’s that 
supposed to mean?” 
“Heard her shoes had six-inch heels.”  
“You lying.”  
“And ﬂying.”  
“Well. If she’s still at the Convent, she must be all right.”  
Deek massaged his toes. “You just partial to those women out  
there. I’d be careful if I was you. How many of them now? Four?” 
105 P ARADISE  
“Three. The old lady died, remember?”  
Deek stared at her, then looked away. “What old lady?”  
“The Reverend Mother. Who’d you think?”  
“Oh, right. Yeah.” Deek continued stirring the blood in his feet.  
Then he laughed. “First time Roger got to use his big new van.” 
“Ambulance,” said Soane, gathering up his clothes. 
“Brought three payments in the next day. Hope he can keep up 
the rest. Not enough hospital or mortuary business around here justify 
that overpriced buggy he got.” 
The coffee smell was starting, and Deek rubbed his palms. 
“Is he hurting?” Soane asked. 
“Not yet. But since his proﬁt depends on the sick and the dead, 
I’d just as soon he went bankrupt.” 
“Deek!” 
“Couldn’t do a damn thing for my boys. Buried in a bag like 
kittens.” 
“They had lovely cofﬁns! Lovely!” 
“Yeah, but inside .... ” 
“Quit, Deek. Why don’t you just quit.” Soane touched her throat. 
“I ’spect he’ll make out. If I go before he does. In which case, well, 
you know what to do. I don’t feature riding in that van nohow, but I 
want a top-of-the-line box, so he’ll make out just ﬁne. Fleet’s the one in 
trouble.” He stood at the sink and lathered his hands. 
“You keep saying that. How come?”  
“Mail order.”  
“What?” Soane poured coffee into the big blue cup her husband  
preferred. 
“You all go to Demby, don’t you? When you want a toaster or an 
electric iron you order out of a catalogue and go all the way out there 
to pick it up. Where’s that put him?” 
“Fleet never has much on hand. And what he does have has been 
there too long. That lounge chair changed colors three times sitting in 
the window.” 
“That’s why,” said Deek. “If he can’t move old inventory, he can’t 
buy new.” 
“He used to do all right.” 
106 Seneca  
Deek tipped a little coffee into the saucer. “Ten years ago. Five.” 
The dark pool rippled under his breath. “Boys coming out of Veetnam, 
getting married, setting up. War money. Farms doing okay, everybody 
doing okay.” He sucked at the saucer rim and sighed his pleasure. 
“Now, well .... ” 
“I don’t understand, Deek.” 
“I do.” He smiled up at her. “You don’t need to.” 
She had not meant that she didn’t understand what he was talking 
about. She’d meant she didn’t understand why he wasn’t worried 
enough by their friends’ money problems to help them out. Why, for 
instance, couldn’t Menus have kept the house he bought? But Soane 
didn’t try to explain; she just looked closely at his face. Smooth, still 
handsome after twenty-six years and beaming, now, with satisfaction. 
Shooting well that morning had settled him and returned things to the 
way they ought to be. Coffee the right color; the right temperature. 
And later today, quail without their brains would melt in his mouth. 
Every day the weather permitted, Deacon Morgan drove his brilliant 
black sedan three-fourths of a mile. From his own house on St. John 
Street, he turned right at the corner onto Central, passed Luke, Mark 
and Matthew, then parked neatly in front of the bank. The silliness of 
driving to where he could walk in less time than it took to smoke a 
cigar was eliminated, in his view, by the weight of the gesture. His car 
was big and whatever he did in it was horsepower and worthy of com -
ment: how he washed and waxed it himself—never letting K.D. or any 
enterprising youngster touch it; how he chewed but did not light cigars 
in it; how he never leaned on it, but if you had a conversation with 
him, standing near it, he combed the hood with his ﬁngernails, scrap -
ing ﬂecks he alone could see, and bufﬁng invisible stains with his 
pocket handkerchief. He laughed along with friends at his vanity, 
because he knew their delight at his weakness went hand in hand with 
their awe: the magical way he (and his twin) accumulated money. His 
prophetic wisdom. His total memory. The most powerful of which was 
one of his earliest. 
Forty-two years ago he had fought for hand room in the rear win -
107 P ARADISE  
dow of Big Daddy Morgan’s Model T, space in which to wave goodbye 
to his mother and baby sister, Ruby. The rest of the family—Daddy, 
Uncle Pryor, his older brother Elder, and Steward, his twin—were 
packed tight against two peck baskets of food. The journey they were 
about to begin would take days, maybe two weeks. The Second Grand 
Tour, Daddy said. The Last Grand Tour, laughed Uncle Pryor. 
The ﬁrst one had been in 1910, before the twins had been born, 
while Haven was still struggling to come alive. Big Daddy drove his 
brother Pryor and his ﬁrstborn son, Elder, all over the state and beyond 
to examine, review and judge other Colored towns. They planned to 
visit two outside Oklahoma and ﬁve within: Boley, Langston City, 
Rentiesville, Taft, Clearview, Mound Bayou, Nicodemus. In the end, 
they made it to only four. Big Daddy, Uncle Pryor and Elder spoke 
endlessly of that trip, how they matched wits with and debated preach -
ers, pharmacists, dry-goods store owners, doctors, newspaper publish -
ers, schoolteachers, bankers. They discussed malaria, the booze bill, 
the threat of white immigrants, the problems with Creek freedmen, 
the trustworthiness of boosters, the practicality of high book learn -
ing, the need for technical training, the consequences of statehood, 
lodges and the violence of whites, random and organized, that swirled 
around them. They stood at the edge of cornﬁelds, walked rows of 
cotton. They visited print shops, elocution classes, church services, 
sawmills; they observed irrigation methods and storage systems. Mostly 
they looked at land, houses, roads. 
Eleven years later Tulsa was bombed, and several of the towns Big 
Daddy, Pryor and Elder had visited were gone. But against all odds, 
in 1932 Haven was thriving. The crash had not touched it: personal 
savings were substantial, Big Daddy Morgan’s bank had taken no risks 
(partly because white bankers locked him out, partly because the sub -
scription shares had been well protected) and families shared every -
thing, made sure no one was short. Cotton crop ruined? The sorghum 
growers split their proﬁt with the cotton growers. A barn burned? The 
pine sappers made sure lumber “accidentally” rolled off wagons at cer -
tain places to be picked up later that night. Pigs rooted up a neighbor’s 
patch? The neighbor was offered replacements by everybody and was 
assured ham at slaughter. The man whose hand was healing from a 
108 Seneca  
chopping block mistake would not get to the second clean bandage 
before a fresh cord was ﬁnished and stacked. Having been refused by 
the world in 1890 on their journey to Oklahoma, Haven residents 
refused each other nothing, were vigilant to any need or shortage. 
The Morgans did not admit to taking pleasure in the failure of 
some of those Colored towns—they carried the rejection of 1890 like a 
bullet in the brain. They simply remarked on the mystery of God’s jus -
tice and decided to take the young twins and go on a second tour to see 
for themselves. 
What they saw was sometimes nothing, sometimes sad, and Deek 
remembered everything. Towns that looked like slave quarters, picked 
up and moved. Towns intoxicated with wealth. Other towns affect -
ing sleep—squirreling away money, certiﬁcates, deeds in unpainted 
houses on unpaved streets. 
In one of the prosperous ones he and Steward watched nineteen 
Negro ladies arrange themselves on the steps of the town hall. They 
wore summer dresses of material the lightness, the delicacy of which 
neither of them had ever seen. Most of the dresses were white, but two 
were lemon yellow and one a salmon color. They wore small, pale hats 
of beige, dusty rose, powdery blue: hats that called attention to the 
wide, sparkly eyes of the wearers. Their waists were not much bigger 
than their necks. Laughing and teasing, they preened for a photogra -
pher lifting his head from beneath a black cloth only to hide under it 
again. Following a successful pose, the ladies broke apart in small 
groups, bending their tiny waists with rippling laughter, walking arm 
in arm. One adjusted another’s brooch; one exchanged her pocket -
book with another. Slender feet turned and tipped in thin leather 
shoes. Their skin, creamy and luminous in the afternoon sun, took 
away his breath. A few of the younger ones crossed the street and 
walked past the rail fence, close, so close, to where he and Steward sat. 
They were on their way to a restaurant just beyond. Deek heard musi -
cal voices, low, full of delight and secret information, and in their tow a 
gust of verbena. The twins did not even look at each other. Without a 
word they agreed to fall off the railing. While they wrestled on the 
ground, ruining their pants and shirts, the Negro ladies turned around 
to see. Deek and Steward got the smiles they wanted before Big Daddy 
109 P ARADISE  
interrupted his conversation and stepped off the porch to pick each 
son up by his pants waist, haul them both onto the porch and crack 
butt with his walking stick. 
Even now the verbena scent was clear; even now the summer 
dresses, the creamy, sunlit skin excited him. If he and Steward had not 
thrown themselves off the railing they would have burst into tears. So, 
among the vivid details of that journey—the sorrow, the stubbornness, 
the cunning, the wealth—Deek’s image of the nineteen summertime 
ladies was unlike the photographer’s. His remembrance was pastel col -
ored and eternal. 
The morning after the meeting at Calvary, pleased with his bird quota 
and ﬁred, not tired, from no sleep, he decided to check out the Oven 
before opening up the bank. So he turned left instead of right on Cen -
tral and drove past the school on the west side, Ace’s Grocery, Fleet-
wood’s Furniture and Appliance and several houses on the east. When 
he arrived at the site he circled it. Except for a few soda cans and some 
paper that had escaped the trash barrel, the place was blank. No ﬁsts. 
No loungers. He should speak to Anna Flood who owned Ace’s store 
now—get her to clean up the pop cans and mess that came from pur -
chases made at her store. That’s what Ace, her father, used to do. 
Swept that place like it was his own kitchen, inside, out and if you’d let 
him he’d sweep all across the road. Pulling back onto Central, Deek 
noticed Misner’s beat-up Ford parked at Anna’s. Beyond, to his left, he 
could hear schoolchildren group-reciting a poem he’d learned by rote 
too, except he had had to hear Dunbar’s lines only once to memorize 
them completely and forever. When he and Steward had enlisted 
there was a lot to learn—from how to tie an army tie to how to pack a 
bag. And just as they had in Haven’s schoolhouse, they had been ﬁrst 
to understand everything, remember everything. But none of it was as 
good as what they learned at home, sitting on the ﬂoor in a ﬁrelit 
room, listening to war stories; to stories of great migrations—those who 
made it and those who did not; to the failures and triumphs of intelli -
gent men—their fear, their bravery, their confusion; to tales of love 
deep and permanent. All there in the one book they owned then. 
110 Seneca  
Black leather covers with gold lettering; the pages thinner than young 
leaves, than petals. The spine frayed into webbing at the top, the cor -
ners ﬁngered down to skin. The strong words, strange at ﬁrst, becom -
ing familiar, gaining weight and hypnotic beauty the more they heard 
them, made them their own. 
As Deek drove north on Central, it and the side streets seemed to 
him as satisfactory as ever. Quiet white and yellow houses full of indus -
try; and in them were elegant black women at useful tasks; orderly 
cupboards minus surfeit or miserliness; linen laundered and ironed to 
perfection; good meat seasoned and ready for roasting. It was a view he 
would be damned if K.D. or the idleness of the young would disturb. 
It was a far cry from the early days of Haven and his grandfather 
would have scoffed at the ease of it—buying property with dollars 
ready to hand instead of trading years of labor for it. He would have 
been embarrassed by grandsons who worked twelve hours ﬁve days a 
week instead of the eighteen-to-twenty-hour days Haven people once 
needed just to keep alive, and who could hunt quail for pleasure rather 
than the desperate need to meet a wife and eight children at table 
without shame. And his cold, rheumy eyes would have narrowed at 
the sight of the Oven. No longer the meeting place to report on what 
done or what needed; on illness, births, deaths, comings and goings. 
The Oven that had witnessed the baptized entering sanctiﬁed life 
was now reduced to watching the lazy young. Two of Sargeant’s boys, 
three of Poole’s, two Seawrights, two Beauchamps, a couple of DuPres 
children—Sut’s and Pious’ girls. Even Arnette and Pat Best’s only 
child used to dawdle there. All of whom ought to be somewhere chop -
ping, canning, mending, fetching. The Oven whose every brick had 
heard live chords praising His name was now subject to radio music, 
record music—music already dead when it ﬁltered through a black 
wire trailing from Anna’s store to the Oven like a snake. But his grand -
father would have been pleased too. Instead of children and adults 
convening at night in those early days to scratch letters and ﬁgures with 
pebbles on scraps of shale, learning to read from those who could, 
there was a schoolhouse here too. Not as big as the one they’d built in 
Haven, but it was open eight months a year and no begging the state 
for money to run it. Not one cent. 
111 P ARADISE  
And just as Big Papa foretold, if they stayed together, worked, 
prayed and defended together, they would never be like Downs, Lex -
ington, Sapulpa, Gans where Colored were run out of town overnight. 
Nor would they be among the dead and maimed of Tulsa, Norman, 
Oklahoma City, not to mention victims of spontaneous whippings, 
murders and depopulation by arson. Except for a crack here, a chink 
there everything in Ruby was intact. There was no need to wonder if 
moving the Oven had been a mistake; whether it needed its original 
soil as foundation for the respect and wholesome utility that was its 
due. No. No, Big Papa. No, Big Daddy. We did right. 
Deek reassured himself with more force than conﬁdence, for he 
was increasingly uneasy about Soane. Nothing he could put his ﬁnger -
nail under, just a steady sense of losing ground. He shared her sadness, 
believed he felt the loss of sons precisely and keenly as she did, except 
he knew more about it than she did. He, like most of the Morgans, had 
seen action, which is to say live death. Watched it when it was visited 
on others; watched it when he visited it on others. He knew that bodies 
did not lie down; that most often they ﬂew apart and that what had 
been shipped to them in those boxes, what they pulled off the train 
platform in Middleton, was a collection of parts that weighed half of 
what a nineteen-year-old would. Easter and Scout were in integrated 
units and if Soane thought about it, she might consider herself lucky 
to know that whatever was missing, the parts were all of black men— 
which was a courtesy and a rule the medics tried hard to apply for fear 
of adding white thighs and feet to a black head. If Soane suspected 
what was likely—oh, man. He regretted having slipped up over coffee 
and mentioned what Roger was unable to do. He did not want her 
even to imagine the single question he put to Roger—ﬁrst with Scout 
then with Easter: Are all the parts black? Meaning, if not, get rid of the 
white pieces. Roger swore to their racial consistency and the regal 
cofﬁns were a sign of Morgan gratitude and a source of balm for 
Soane. Still, the residue of that loss seemed to be accumulating in a 
way he could not control. He did not trust the medicine she took and 
he certainly did not trust its source. But there was nothing in her 
behavior he could fault. She was as beautiful as it was possible for a 
good woman to be; she kept a good home and did good works every -
112 Seneca  
where. Was, in fact, more generous than he would have liked, but that 
was hardly a complaint. There was nothing to do about it. Soane was 
burdened with the loss of two sons; he was burdened with the loss of all 
sons. Since his twin had no children the Morgans had arrived at the 
end of the line. Well, yes, there were Elder’s children—a ﬂock of them 
roosting everywhere except at home, some of whom visited Ruby for a 
week only to cut it short, so eager were they to get away from the peace 
they found dull, the industry they found tedious and the heat they 
found insulting. So it was useless even to think of them as part of the 
legitimate line of Morgans. He and Steward were truer heirs, proof of 
which was Ruby itself. Who, other than the rightful heirs, would have 
repeated exactly what Zechariah and Rector had done? But since part 
of the charge had been to multiply, it was a heavy hurt to know that 
K.D.  was the only means by which they could. K.D., son of a sister and
the army buddy they gave her to. The knot that formed in Deek’s chest 
whenever he thought about her was familiar. Ruby. That sweet, mod -
est laughing girl whom he and Steward had protected all their lives. 
She had gotten sick on the trip; seemed to heal, but failed rapidly 
again. When it became clear she needed serious medical help, there 
was no way to provide it. They drove her to Demby, then further to 
Middleton. No colored people were allowed in the wards. No regular 
doctor would attend them. She had lost control, then consciousness by 
the time they got to the second hospital. She died on the waiting room 
bench while the nurse tried to ﬁnd a doctor to examine her. When the 
brothers learned the nurse had been trying to reach a veterinarian, and 
they gathered their dead sister in their arms, their shoulders shook all 
the way home. Ruby was buried, without beneﬁt of a mortuary, in a 
pretty spot on Steward’s ranch, and it was then that the bargain was 
struck. A prayer in the form of a deal, no less, with God, no less, which 
He seemed to honor until 1969, when Easter and Scout were shipped 
home. After that they understood the terms and conditions of the deal 
much better. 
Perhaps they had made a mistake in 1970, discouraging K.D. and 
Fleet’s daughter. She was pregnant but, after a short stay at that Con -
vent, if she had it, she sure didn’t have it. The uncles had been worried 
about the shape Fleetwood’s offspring took, and besides, there were 
113 P ARADISE  
other suitable candidates around. But K.D. was still messing around 
with one of the strays living out there where the entrance to hell is 
wide, and it was time to give him the news: every brothel don’t hang a 
red light in the window. 
He was braking in front of the bank when he noticed a solitary 
ﬁgure ahead. He recognized her right away but watched her carefully 
because ﬁrst of all she had no coat, and because second, he had not 
seen her out of her house in six years. 
Central Avenue, three wide graded miles of tarmac, began at the 
Oven and ended at Sargeant’s Feed and Seed. The four side streets 
east of Central were named after the Gospels. When a ﬁfth street was 
needed it was named St. Peter. Later on, as Ruby grew, streets were 
laid on the west side of Central, and although these newer streets were 
continuations of those on the east—situated right across from them— 
they acquired secondary names. So St. John Street on the east become 
Cross John on the west. St. Luke became Cross Luke. The sanity of 
this pleased most everybody, Deek especially, and there was always 
room for additional houses (ﬁnanced, if need be, by the Morgan broth -
ers’ bank) in the plots and acres behind and beyond those already 
built. The woman Deek was watching seemed to be leaving Cross 
Peter Street and heading toward Sargeant’s Feed and Seed. But she did 
not stop there. Instead she was moving resolutely north, where Deek 
knew there was nothing for seventeen miles. What could the sweetest 
girl, named for her nature, be doing coatless on a chilly October morn -
ing that far from the home she had not stepped out of since 1967? 
A movement in his rearview mirror took his attention, and he rec -
ognized the small red truck coming in from south country. Its driver 
would be Aaron Poole, late, as Deek knew he would be, since he was 
bringing in the ﬁnal payment on his loan. After considering letting 
Poole wait and driving on to catch up with Sweetie, Deek cut off his 
motor. July, his clerk and secretary, was not due until ten. There 
should be no occasion when the bank of a good and serious town did 
not open on time. 
... 
114 Seneca  
Anna Flood said, “See. Just look at him.” 
She was watching Deek’s sedan circle the Oven and then cruise 
slowly past her store. “Why does he have to hover like that?” 
Richard Misner looked up from the woodstove. “He’s just check -
ing on things,” he said, and went back to laying the ﬁre. “Got a right, 
doesn’t he? It’s sort of his town, wouldn’t you say? His and Steward’s?” 
“I would not. They may act like they own it, but they don’t.” 
Misner liked a tight ﬁre, and the one he was preparing would be 
just that. “Well, they founded it, didn’t they?” 
“Who’ve you been talking to?” Anna left the window and walked 
to the back stairs, leading to her apartment. There she slid a pan of 
meat leavings and cereal under the stairwell. The cat, turned vicious 
by motherhood, stared at her with warning eyes. “Fifteen families 
founded this town. Fifteen, not two. One was my father, another my 
uncle—” 
“You know what I mean,” Misner interrupted her. 
Anna peeped into the darkness trying to see inside the box where 
the litter lay. “I do not.” 
“The money,” said Misner. “The Morgans had the money. I guess 
I should say they ﬁnanced the town—not founded it.” 
The cat would not eat while being watched, so Anna forfeited a 
peep at the kittens and turned back to Richard Misner. “You wrong 
there too. Everybody pitched in. The bank idea was just a way of doing 
it. Families bought shares in it, you know, instead of just making 
deposits they could run through any old time. This way their money 
was safe.” 
Misner nodded and wiped his hands. He didn’t want another argu -
ment. Anna refused to understand the difference between investing 
and cooperating. Just as she refused to believe the woodstove gave 
more warmth than her little electric heater. 
“The Morgans had the resources, that’s all,” she said. “From their 
father’s bank back in Haven. My grandfather, Able Flood, was his part -
ner. Everybody called him Big Daddy, but his real name was—” 
“I know, I know. Rector. Rector Morgan, also known as Big Daddy. 
Son of Zechariah Morgan, known throughout Christendom as Big 
115 P ARADISE  
Papa.” And then he quoted a refrain the citizens of Ruby loved to 
recite. “ ‘Rector’s bank failed, but he didn’t.’ ” 
“It’s true. The bank had to close down—in the early forties—but it 
didn’t close out. I mean they had enough so we could start over. I know 
what you’re thinking, but you can’t honestly say it didn’t work. People 
prosper here. Everybody.” 
“Everybody’s prospering on credit, Anna. That’s not the same 
thing.” 
“So?” 
“So what if the credit’s gone?” 
“It can’t be gone. We own the bank; the bank doesn’t own us.” 
“Aw, Anna. You don’t get it, do you? You don’t understand.” 
She enjoyed his face even when he was putting down people she 
liked. Steward, for example, he seemed to despise, but it was Steward 
who had taught her the scorpion lesson. When Anna was four, she was 
sitting on the new porch of her father’s store—back in 1954—when 
everybody was building something while a group of men including 
Steward were helping Ace Flood ﬁnish the shelving. They were inside, 
resting after a quick lunch, while Anna derailed ants on the steps: 
introducing obstacles into their routes, watching them climb over the 
leaf’s edge and go on as though a brand-new green mountain were an 
inevitable part of their journey. Suddenly a scorpion shot out near her 
bare foot, and she ran wide-eyed into the store. The talk stopped while 
the men weighed this infantile interruption, and it was Steward who 
picked her up in his arms, asked, What’s bothering you, good-lookin’? 
and relieved her fears. Anna clung to him while he explained that the 
scorpion’s tail was up because it was just as scared of her as she was of 
it. In Detroit, watching baby-faced police handling guns, she remem -
bered the scorpion’s rigid tail. Once, she had asked Steward what it 
felt like to be a twin. “Can’t say,” he answered, “since I was never not 
one. But I guess it feels more complete.” 
“Like you can never be lonely?” Anna asked. 
“Well, yes. Like that. But more lik e . . . sup erior.” 
When Ace died she came back to Ruby and was about to sell 
out—the store, the apartment, the car, everything—and return to 
116 Seneca  
Detroit, when he came riding into town, alone, in a beat-up Ford. 
Calvary’s new minister. 
Anna folded her arms on the wooden counter. “I own this store. 
My daddy died—it’s mine. No rent. No mortgage. Just taxes, town 
fees. I buy things; I sell things; the markup is mine.” 
“You’re lucky. What about the farms? Suppose a crop fails, say, two 
years in a row. Does old Mrs. Sands or Nathan DuPres get to take out 
their share? Borrow on it? Sell it to the bank? What?” 
“I don’t know what they do, but I do know it’s no gain to the bank 
for them to lose it. So they’d give them money to buy more seed, 
guano, whatever.” 
“You mean lend them the money.” 
“You’re making my head ache. Where you come from, all that 
might be true. Ruby’s different.” 
“Hope so.” 
“Is so. Any problem brewing sure ain’t money.” 
“Well, what is it then?” 
“Hard to ﬁgure, but I don’t like the way Deek’s face looks when 
he’s checking the Oven. He does it every day God sends now. More 
like hunting than checking. They’re just kids.” 
“That ﬁst painting scared a lot of people.” 
“Why? It was a picture! You’d think somebody had burned a 
cross!” Annoyed, she started wiping things—jars, case fronts, the soda 
pop cooler. “He should talk to the parents, not go hunting for the kids 
like he’s a sheriff. Kids need more than what’s here.” 
Misner couldn’t agree more. Since the murder of Martin Luther 
King, new commitments had been sworn, laws introduced but most of 
it was decorative: statues, street names, speeches. It was as though 
something valuable had been pawned and the claim ticket lost. That 
was what Destry, Roy, Little Mirth and the rest were looking for. 
Maybe the ﬁst painter was looking for it too. In any case, if they 
couldn’t ﬁnd the ticket, they might break into the pawnshop. Question 
was, who pawned it in the ﬁrst place and why. 
“You told me that’s why you left—nothing to do—but you never 
said why you came back.” 
117 P ARADISE  
Anna wasn’t about to explain all of that, so she elaborated on what 
he already knew. “Yeah. Well. Thought I could do something up 
north. Something real that wouldn’t break my heart. But it was all, I 
don’t know, talk, running around. I got confused. Still, I don’t regret 
going one bit—even though it didn’t work out.” 
“Well, I’m glad it didn’t, whatever the reason.” He stroked her 
hand. 
Anna returned his touch. “I’m worried,” she said. “About Billie 
Delia. We have to come up with something, Richard. Something 
more than choir competitions and Bible class and ribbons for fat 
vegetables and baby shower s... ” 
“What about her?” 
“Oh, I don’t know. She came in here a while back, and I knew 
right away she had something on her mind, but the truck was late with 
my goods, so I was short with her.” 
“Which is to say what?” 
“She’s gone off. At least I think so. Nobody’s seen her.” 
“What does her mother say?” 
Anna shrugged. “Pat’s hard to talk to. Kate asked her about Billie 
Delia—hadn’t seen her at choir practice. Know what she did? 
Answered Kate’s question with another.” Anna mimicked Pat Best’s 
soft, cold voice. “ ‘Why do you need to know that?’ She and Kate are 
close, too.” 
“You think she’s courting harm? She couldn’t just disappear with -
out anybody knowing where to.” 
“I don’t know what I think.” 
“Talk to Roger. He should know. He’s her grandfather.” 
“You ask him. Not me.” 
“Say, what is all this feeling about Roger? I’ve been here three 
years, almost, and I can’t make out why folks freeze around him. Is it 
his mortuary business?” 
“Probably. That and, well, he ‘prepared,’ if you get my meaning, 
his own wife.” 
“Oh.” 
“That’s something to think about, ain’t it?” 
“Still.” 
118 Seneca  
They were quiet for a moment, thinking about it. Then Anna 
walked around the counter and stood at the window. “You know, you 
right smart about weather. This is the third time I disbelieved you and 
was proved wrong.” 
Misner joined her. Just touching the pane they could tell the tem -
perature had dropped suddenly into the teens. 
“Go ahead. Light it,” she said, laughing and happy to be wrong if 
it made this man she adored right. There were church women who 
disapproved of his obvious interest in her—her and nobody else. And 
Pat Best was skilled at hiding her own interest in him. But Anna 
thought there was more to it than perhaps their own plans for this 
handsome, intelligent man and their various daughters and nieces. 
She was certain the disapproval was mostly because of her unstraight -
ened hair. My God, the conversations she had been forced to have 
when she came back from Detroit. Strange, silly, invasive probings. 
She felt as though they were discussing her pubic hair, her underarm 
hair. That if she had walked completely naked down the street they 
would have commented only on the hair on her head. The subject 
summoned more passion, invited more opinions, solicited more anger 
than that prostitute Menus brought home from Virginia. She probably 
would have straightened it again, eventually—it wasn’t a permanent 
change or a statement—except it clariﬁed so much for her in the days 
when she was confused about so much else. Instantly she could iden -
tify friends and those who were not; recognize the well-brought-up, 
the ill-raised, the threatened, the insecure. Dovey Morgan liked it; Pat 
Best hated it; Deek and Steward shook their heads; Kate Golightly 
loved it and helped her keep it shaped; Reverend Pulliam preached a 
whole sermon about it; K.D. laughed at it; most of the young people 
admired it, except Arnette. Like a Geiger counter, her hair registered, 
she believed, tranquillity or the intensity of a rumbling, deep-down 
disorder. 
The ﬁre, smelling wonderfully, attracted the mother cat. She 
curled up behind the stove, though her eyes remained alert to 
predators—human or otherwise. 
“Let me make some coffee,” Anna said, eyeing the clouds above 
Holy Redeemer. “This might get serious.” 
119 P ARADISE  
Ace Flood’s faith had been the mountain-moving kind, so he built 
his store to last. Sandstone. Sturdier than some churches. Four rooms 
for his family above; below, a spacious storeroom, a tiny bedroom, and 
a ﬁfteen-foot-high selling area crammed with shelves, bins, cases and 
drawers. The windows were regular house type—he didn’t want or 
need display; no big, wasteful “looking-in” plate glass for him. Let folks 
come inside to see what he had. He didn’t have many things but he 
had a lot of what he stocked. Before he died, he saw his store change 
from a necessary service in Ruby to a business patronized by the loyal 
for certain items, though they balked at his prices and more and more 
drove their trucks to Demby for cheaper (and better) supplies. Anna 
changed all that. What Ace’s Grocery now lacked in size of inventory 
it gained in variety and style. She offered free coffee on cold days, iced 
tea when it was hot. She put out two chairs and a small table for the 
elderly and those who drove in from farms and wanted to rest awhile. 
And since adults, nowadays, never frequented the Oven next to her 
store—except for special events—she catered to the appetites of the 
young who liked to gather there. She sold her own pies, made her own 
candy along with the lots she picked up in Demby. She kept three 
kinds of soda pop instead of one. Sometimes she sold the black-
as-eight-rock peppers the Convent grew. She kept hog’s head cheese 
in the cooler, as her father had, along with local butter and salted 
pork. But canned goods, dried beans, coffee, sugar, syrup, baking 
soda, ﬂour, salt, catsup, paper products—all the items nobody could or 
wanted to make at home—took up the space Ace Flood once used 
for cloth, work shoes, light tools, kerosene. Now Sargeant’s Feed and 
Seed sold the shoes, the tools, the kerosene, and Harper’s drugstore 
sold the needles, thread, counter medicine, prescriptions, sanitary 
napkins, stationery and tobacco. Except for Blue Boy. Steward had 
relied on Ace for that and wasn’t about to change his habits. 
In Anna’s hands, Ace’s Grocery blossomed through variety, com -
fort and ﬂexibility. Because she let Menus cut hair in the back on 
Saturdays, incidental purchases rose. Because she had a nice toilet 
downstairs, casual users felt obliged to become customers before they 
left. Farming women came in for peppermint after church; the men 
120 Seneca  
for sacks of raisins. Invariably they picked up a little something more 
from the shelves. 
The contentment she drew from Richard’s ﬁre made her smile. 
But she couldn’t be a minister’s wife. Never. Could she? Well, he had 
not asked her to be one—so enjoy the stove heat, the nape of his neck 
and the invisible presence of kittens. 
After a while, a station wagon drove up and parked so close to the 
store, both Misner and Anna could see the fever in the baby’s blue 
eyes. The mother held the child over her shoulder and stroked its 
yellow hair. The driver, a city-dressed man in his forties, got out and 
pushed open Anna’s door. 
“How you all doing?” He smiled. 
“Fine, and you?” 
“Look like I’m lost. Been trying to ﬁnd eighteen west for more’n an 
hour.” He looked at Misner and grinned an apology for having violated 
the male rule of never asking for directions. “Wife made me stop. Said 
she’s had it.” 
“It’s a ways back the way you come from,” said Misner, looking at 
the Arkansas plates, “but I can tell you how to ﬁnd it.” 
“’Preciate it. ’Preciate it,” said the man. “Don’t expect there’s a 
doctor around here, is there?” 
“Not around these parts. You have to get to Demby for that.” 
“What’s wrong with the baby?” Anna asked. 
“Sort of pukey. Hot too. We’re fairly well supplied, but who’d pack 
aspirin or cough medicine on a little old trip like this? Can’t think of 
every damn thing, can you? Jesus.” 
“Your baby coughing? I don’t believe you need cough medicine.” 
Anna squinted through the window. “Ask your wife to come in out the 
cold.” 
“Drugstore’ll have aspirin,” said Misner. 
“I didn’t see no drugstore. Where ’bouts is it?” 
“You passed it, but it doesn’t look like a drugstore—looks like a 
regular house.” 
“How am I going to ﬁnd it then? Houses round here don’t seem to 
have numbers.” 
121 P ARADISE  
“Tell me what all you want and I’ll get it for you. Then tell your 
wife to bring that baby inside.” Misner reached for his coat. 
“Just some aspirin and some cough medicine. ’Preciate it. I’ll get 
my wife.” 
The blast from the open door rattled the coffee cups. The man 
got back in the station wagon; Misner took off in his ratty Ford. Anna 
thought about making some cinnamon toast. The pumpkin bread 
would be stale now. Be nice if she had an overripe banana—the baby 
looked constipated. Mush it up with a little apple butter. 
The man came back shaking his head. “I’ll just keep the motor 
running. She says she’ll stay put.” 
Anna nodded. “You got far to go?” 
“Lubbock. Say, is that coffee hot?” 
“Uh huh. How you like it?” 
“Black and sweet.” 
He’d taken two sips when the station wagon horn sounded. “Shit. 
Excuse me,” he said. When he came back he bought licorice, peanut 
butter, crackers and three Royal Crowns and carried them out to his 
wife. Then he returned to ﬁnish his coffee, sipping it in silence while 
Anna poked the ﬁre. 
“You better gas up when you get on eighteen. Blizzard’s coming.” 
He laughed. “Blizzard? In Lubbock, Texas?” 
“You ain’t in Texas yet,” said Anna. She looked toward the window 
and saw two ﬁgures approach, then Misner shouldered open the door, 
with Steward close on his heels. 
“Here you go,” said Misner, handing over the bottles. The man 
took them and rushed out to the station wagon. Misner followed to 
give him directions. 
“Who all is that?” asked Steward. 
“Just some lost folks.” Anna handed him a thirty-two-ounce tin of 
Blue Boy. 
“Lost folks or lost whites?” 
“Oh, Steward, please.” 
“Big difference, Anna girl. Big. Right, Reverend?” Misner was just 
stepping back in. 
“They get lost like everybody else,” said Anna. 
122 Seneca  
“Born lost. Take over the world and still lost. Right, Reverend?”  
“You just contradicted yourself.” Anna laughed.  
“God has one people, Steward. You know that.” Misner rubbed his  
hands, then blew on them. 
“Reverend,” said Steward, “I’ve heard you say things out of igno -
rance, but this is the ﬁrst time I heard you say something based on 
ignorance.” 
Misner smiled and was about to answer when the lost man entered 
again to pay Misner for the medicine. 
“Blizzard’s heading in.” Steward looked at the man’s light clothing 
and thin shoes. “You might want to ride it out somewhere. Gas station 
on eighteen. Wouldn’t go no further than that if I was you.” 
“I’ll beat it.” The man closed his wallet. “I’ll gas up on eighteen, 
but we crossing that state line today. Thank you. You all been a big 
help. ’Preciate it.” 
“They never listen,” said Steward as the station wagon drove away. 
He himself, having been around in 1958 when whole herds froze, had 
been pumping water, nailing down, forking alfalfa and storing up 
since Wednesday. He was in town for tobacco and syrup and to pick 
up Dovey. 
“Say, Steward,” Misner said. “You seen Roger’s granddaughter, 
Billie Delia?” 
“What should I see her for?” 
“Anna says nobody has. Of course, we haven’t asked her mother.” 
Steward, picking up on the “we,” put a crisp ﬁve-dollar bill on the 
counter. “You won’t get nothing there,” he said, thinking, No major 
loss if she did run off. Serve Pat right, he thought. She noses about in 
everybody’s business but clams up if you get near hers. “That reminds 
me, Deek told me he saw Sweetie this morning—just walking on 
down the road. No overcoat. Nothing.” 
“Sweetie? Out of her house?” Anna stressed her disbelief.  
“Down what road?” asked Misner.  
“Not Sweetie.”  
“Deek swears it was her.”  
“Must have been,” said Misner. “I saw her too. Right outside my  
house. I thought she was going to knock, but she turned around 
123 P ARADISE  
and headed back toward Central. Look to me like she was going on 
home.” 
“Didn’t. Deek said she was way past Sargeant’s—marching out of 
town like a soldier.” 
“Didn’t he stop her?” 
Steward stared at Anna as though he couldn’t believe her words. 
“He was opening up the bank, girl.” 
Misner frowned. Anna cut off anything he might have been about 
to say with, “You all want some coffee? Maybe some pumpkin bread?” 
Both men accepted. 
“Somebody better speak to Jeff.” It was Anna’s voice but all three 
glanced at a wall of shelves beyond which was Fleetwood’s Furniture 
and Appliance. 
Despite the predictions—from Richard Misner’s gaze, Steward 
Morgan’s watchfulness—a tiny piece of the sky ﬂashed a watercolor 
palette: orange-peach, minty green, seashore blue. The rest of the sky, 
pewter, served to brighten this odd, picture-book sun break. It lasted 
a full hour and thrilled everybody who saw it. Then it faded, and a 
leaden sky solidiﬁed over the relentless wind. By noon the ﬁrst snow 
came. Stinging pellets, popping, not melting, before the wind. The 
second snow, two hours later, didn’t pop. It lay down quietly and cov -
ered everything there was. 
Sweetie had said, “Be back directly, Miss Mable.” “Won’t be gone but 
a minute, Miss Mable.” 
Meant to say it. Maybe she did say it. Anyway it was in her head to 
say. But she had to hurry quick before one of them gurgled. 
On the porch, the walkway, Sweetie’s stride was purposeful—as 
though there were somewhere important she had to be. Something 
important she had to do and it would take just a few minutes and she 
would be right back. In time to massage a little bottom to keep the 
sores away; or to siphon phlegm or grind food or clean teeth or trim 
nails or launder out urine or cradle in her arms or sing but mostly in 
time to watch. To never take her eyes off unless her mother-in-law was 
there, and to watch then as well, because Miss Mable’s eyes weren’t as 
124 Seneca  
sharp as they once had been. Others offered help, repeatedly at ﬁrst, 
irregularly now, but she always declined. Sweetie was the best at 
watching. Her mother-in-law second best. Arnette used to be good, but 
not anymore. Jeff and her father-in-law couldn’t look, let alone watch. 
The problem had never been watching while she was awake. It 
was watching while asleep. For six years she slept on the pallet near the 
cribs, or in bed with Jeff, her breath threaded, her ear tunnel ready, 
every muscle braced to spring. She knew she slept because she 
dreamed a little, although she couldn’t remember what about. But it 
was getting harder and harder to watch and sleep at the same time. 
When dawn broke and Mable came into the dim room with a cup 
of coffee, Sweetie stood to take it. She knew Mable had already run 
her bathwater and folded a towel and fresh nightgown over the chair in 
the bedroom. And she knew she would offer to do her hair—braid it, 
wash it, roll it or just scratch her scalp. The coffee would be wonderful, 
dark and loaded with sugar. But she also knew that if she drank it this 
one time and went to bed in morning sun this one time she would 
never wake up, and who would watch her babies then? 
So she took the coffee and said, or meant to, “Be back in a minute, 
Miss Mable.” 
Downstairs, she put the cup and saucer on the dining table, then, 
unwashed, coatless and with uncombed hair, she opened the front 
door and left. Quickly. 
She was not hoping to walk until she dropped or fainted or froze 
and then slipped into nothingness for a while. The small thing she 
wanted was not to have that dawn coffee, the already drawn bath, the 
folded nightgown and then the watchful sleep in that order, forever, 
every day and in particular this here particular day. The only way to 
change the order, she thought, was not to do something differently but 
to do a different thing. Only one possibility arose—to leave her house 
and step into a street she had not entered in six years. 
Sweetie traveled the length of Central Avenue—past the Gospel-
named streets, past New Zion, Harper’s Drugstore, the bank, Mount 
Calvary. She detoured into Cross Peter, left it and walked past 
Sargeant’s Feed and Seed. North of Ruby, where the quality of the 
road changed twice, her legs were doing brilliantly. So was her skin, 
125 P ARADISE  
for she didn’t feel the cold. The fresh outside air, to which she was 
unaccustomed, hurt her nostrils, and she set her face to bear it. She did 
not know she was smiling, nor did the girl staring at her from the bed 
of a brand-new ’73 pickup. The girl thought Sweetie was crying, and 
a black woman weeping on a country road broke her heart all over 
again. 
She peered at Sweetie from her hiding place among empty crates. 
The Ford truck, heading south, slowed as it passed Sweetie, then 
stopped. In the cab, the driver and his wife exchanged looks. Then the 
driver leaned out the window, twisting his head to holler at Sweetie’s 
back, “You need some help?” 
Sweetie did not turn her head or acknowledge the offer. The 
couple looked at each other and sucked teeth as the husband shifted 
into drive. Fortunately, the road inclined at that point, otherwise the 
brokenhearted hitchhiker would have hurt herself when she jumped 
from the back of the truck. The couple could see in the rearview mir -
ror a passenger they didn’t know they had, running to join the pitiful, 
ill-raised creature who had not even said No, thank you. 
When the girl whose heart was breaking caught up with the 
woman, she knew enough not to touch or speak or insert herself into 
the determined bubble the crying woman had become. She walked 
ten or so paces behind, studying the shapely dark ankles above worn 
white loafers. The wrinkled shirtwaist dress, pale blue with sagging 
pockets. The sleeper’s hair—pressed ﬂat on one side, disheveled on 
the other. And every now and then a sob that sounded like a giggle. 
They moved this way for more than a mile. The walker going 
somewhere; the hitcher going anywhere. The wraith and her shadow. 
The morning was cold, cloudy. Wind streamed the tall grasses on 
either side of the road. 
Fifteen years ago, when the brokenhearted hitcher was ﬁve years 
old, she had spent four nights and ﬁve days knocking on every door in 
her building. 
“Is my sister in here?” 
Some said no; some said who?; some said what’s your name, little 
girl? Most didn’t open the door at all. That was 1958, when a child 
could play all over brand-new government housing in safety. 
126 Seneca  
The ﬁrst two days, after making her rounds on ﬂoors ever higher, 
higher, and making sure she had not missed a single door, she waited. 
Jean, her sister, would be coming back anytime now, because dinner 
food was on the table—meat loaf, string beans, catsup, white bread— 
and a full pitcher of Kool-Aid was in the refrigerator. She occupied 
herself with two coloring books, a deck of cards and a wetting baby 
doll. She drank milk, ate potato chips, saltines with apple jelly and, 
little by little, the whole meat loaf. By the time the hated string beans 
were all that was left of the dinner, they were too shriveled and mushy 
to bear. 
The third day, she began to understand why Jean was gone and 
how to get her back. She cleaned her teeth and washed her ears care -
fully. She also ﬂushed the toilet right away, as soon as she used it, and 
folded her socks inside her shoes. She spent a long time wiping up the 
Kool-Aid and picking up the pieces of glass from the pitcher that 
crashed when she tried to lift it from the refrigerator. She remembered 
the Lorna Doones that were in the bread box but dared not climb up 
on a chair to open it. Those were her prayers: if she did everything 
right without being told, either Jean would walk in or when she 
knocked on one of the apartment doors, there’d she be! Smiling and 
holding out her arms. 
Meantime the nights were terrible. 
On the fourth day, having brushed her eighteen milk teeth until 
the toothbrush was pink with blood, she stared out of the window 
through warm rain-sprinkle at morning people going to work, children 
to school. Then for a long time no one passed. Then an old woman 
with a man’s jacket roofed above her head against the ﬁne rain. Then 
a man tossing seed on bare places in the grass. Then a tall woman 
walked past the window. No coat and nothing on her head, she 
touched her eyes with the back of her arm, the inside of her wrist. She 
was crying. 
Later, the sixth day, when the caseworker came, she thought about 
the crying woman who looked nothing at all like Jean—was not even 
the same color. But before that, on the ﬁfth day, she found—or rather 
saw—something that had been right there for her all along. Demoral -
ized by unanswered prayers, bleeding gums and hunger she gave up 
127 P ARADISE  
goodness, climbed up on a chair and opened the bread box. Leaning 
against the box of Lorna Doones was an envelope with a word she 
recognized instantly: her own name printed in lipstick. She opened 
it, even before she tore into the cookie box, and pulled out a single 
sheet of paper with more lipstick words. She could not understand any 
except her own name again at the top, “Jean” at the bottom, loud red 
marks in between. 
Soaking in happiness, she folded the letter back in the envelope, 
put it in her shoe and carried it for the rest of her life. Hiding it, ﬁght -
ing for the right to keep it, rescuing it from wastebaskets. She was six 
years old, an ardent ﬁrst-grade student, before she could read the 
whole page. Over time, it became simply a sheet of paper smeared ﬁre -
cracker red, not one decipherable word left. But it was the letter, safe 
in her shoe, that made leaving with the caseworker for the ﬁrst of two 
foster homes possible. She thought about the crying woman brieﬂy 
then, more later, until the sight of her became an occasional heart -
breaking dream. 
The wind that had been stirring the grass was carrying snow 
now—scarce, sandy and biting like glass. The hitcher stopped to pull 
a serape from her duffel, then ran to catch up and wrap it around the 
walker’s shoulders. 
Sweetie ﬂailed her hands until she understood that she was being 
warmed, not prevented. Not once, while the wool cloth was being 
wrapped around her shoulders, did she stop walking. She kept on mov -
ing, chuckling—or was it sobbing? 
The hitcher remembered passing a large house less than a half 
hour earlier as she hid among the crates. What took twenty minutes 
in a truck would take pedestrians hours, but she thought they ought 
to be able to reach the place before dark. The question was the cold; 
another was how to stop the crying woman, get her to rest and, once 
they reached shelter, get her inside it. Eyes like those were not uncom -
mon. In hospitals they belonged to patients who paced day and night; 
on the road, unconﬁned, people with eyes like that would walk for -
ever. The hitcher decided to spend the time talking and started out by 
introducing herself. 
128 Seneca  
Sweetie heard what she said and, for the ﬁrst time since she’d 
left her house, stumbled as she turned her smiling—or crying—face 
toward the uninvited companion. Sin, she thought. I am walking next 
to sin and wrapped in its cloak. “Have mercy,” she murmured, and 
gave a little laugh—or whimper. 
By the time they saw the Convent, Sweetie was cozy. Although she 
had felt none of the biting cold sweeping the road, she was comforted 
by the warm snow covering her hair, ﬁlling her shoes. And grateful to 
be so clearly protected from and unassociated with the sin shape walk -
ing next to her. The sign of Sweetie’s state of grace was how badly the 
warm snow whipped the shape, silenced it, froze it and left it breathing 
heavily, barely able to hang on, while she, Sweetie, marched unbowed 
through the cutting wind. 
Of her own accord, Sweetie slogged up the driveway. But she let 
the demon do the rest. 
The woman who opened the door to the banging said “Ooh!” and 
yanked them both inside. 
They seemed like birds, hawks, to Sweetie. Pecking at her, ﬂap -
ping. They made her sweat. Had she been stronger, not so tired from 
the night shift of tending her babies, she would have fought them 
off. As it was, other than pray, there was nothing she could do. They 
put her in a bed under so many blankets perspiration ran into her ears. 
Nothing they offered would she eat or drink. Her lips were shut, her 
teeth clenched. Silently, fervently, she prayed for deliverance, and 
don’t you know she got it: they left her alone. In the quiet room 
Sweetie thanked her Lord and drifted into a staticky, troubled sleep. It 
was the baby cry that woke her, not the shivering. Weak as she was, she 
got up, or tried to. Her head hurt and her mouth was dry. She noticed 
that she was not in a bed but on a leather couch in a dark room. 
Sweetie’s teeth were rattling when one of the hawks, with a blood-red 
mouth, came into the room carrying a kerosene lamp. It spoke to her 
in the sweetest voice, the way a demon would, but Sweetie called on 
her Savior, and it left. Somewhere in the house the child continued to 
cry, ﬁlling Sweetie with rapture—she had never heard that sound from 
her own. Never heard that clear yearning call, sustained, rhythmic. It 
129 P ARADISE  
was like an anthem, a lullaby, or the bracing chords of the decalogue. 
All of her children were silent. Suddenly, in the midst of joy, she was 
angry. Babies cry here among these demons but not in her house? 
When two of the hawks came back, one carrying a tray of food, she 
asked them, “Why is that child crying here?” 
They denied it, of course. Lied straight through the weeping that 
sifted through the room. One of them even tried to distract her, saying: 
“I’ve heard children laughing. Singing sometimes. But never 
crying.” 
The other one cackled. 
“Let me out of here.” Sweetie struggled to make her voice shout. 
“I have to get home.” 
“I’m going to take you. Soon as the car warms up.” Same sly 
demon tones. 
“Now,” said Sweetie. 
“Take some aspirin and eat some of this.” 
“You let me out of this place now.” 
“What a bitch,” said one. 
“It’s just fever,” said the other. “And keep your mouth shut, can’t 
you?” 
It was patience, and blocking out every sound except the admoni -
tions of her Lord, that got her out of there. First into a rusty red car that 
stalled in the snow at the foot of the driveway, and ﬁnally, praise, praise 
His holy name, into her husband’s arms. 
He was with Anna Flood. They had been on their way from the 
minute she’d called on her Savior. Sweetie literally fell into Jeff’s arms. 
“What you doing way out here? We couldn’t get through all night. 
Where is your mind? Lord, girl. Sweetheart. What happened?” 
“They made me, snatched me,” Sweetie cried. “Oh God, take me 
home. I’m sick, Anna, and I have to look after the babies.” 
“Shh. Don’t worry about that.” 
“I have to. I have to.” 
“It’s going to be all right now. Arnette’s coming home.” 
“Turn the heater up. I’m so cold. How come I’m so cold?” 
... 
130 Seneca  
Seneca stared at the ceiling. The cot’s mattress was thin and hard. 
The wool blanket scratched her chin, and her palms hurt from shovel -
ing snow in the driveway. She had slept on ﬂoors, on cardboard, on 
nightmare-producing water beds and, for weeks at a time, in the back 
seat of Eddie’s car. But she could not fall asleep on this clean, narrow 
childish bed. 
The crying woman had ﬂipped—in the night and the next morn -
ing as well. Seneca had spent the whole night up, listening to Mavis 
and Gigi. The house seemed to belong to them, although they 
referred to somebody named Connie. They cooked for her and didn’t 
pry. Other than discussing her name—where’d she get it?—they 
behaved as though they knew all about her and were happy for her to 
stay. Later, in the afternoon, when she thought she would drop from 
exhaustion, they showed her to a bedroom with two cots. 
“Nap awhile,” said Mavis. “I’ll call you when dinner’s ready. You 
like fried chicken?” Seneca thought she would throw up. 
They didn’t like each other at all, so Seneca had equalized her 
smiles and agreeableness. If one cursed and joked nastily about the 
other, Seneca laughed. When the other rolled her eyes in disgust, 
Seneca shot her an understanding look. Always the peacemaker. The 
one who said yes or I don’t mind or I’ll go. Otherwise—what? They 
might not like her. Might cry. Might leave. So she had done her best to 
please, even if the Bible turned out to be heavier than the shoes. Like 
all ﬁrst offenders, he wanted both right away. Seneca had no trouble 
with the size eleven Adidas, but Preston, Indiana, didn’t sport book -
stores, religious or regular. She detoured to Bloomington and found 
something called The Living Bible, and one without color pictures but 
with lots of lined pages for recording dates of births, deaths, marriages, 
baptisms. It seemed a marvelous thing—a list of whole families’ activi -
ties over the years—so she chose it. He was angry, of course; so much 
that it dimmed his pleasure in the extravagant black and white running 
shoes. 
“Can’t you get anything right? Just a small Bible! Not a goddamn 
encyclopedia!” 
He was guilty as charged and she had known him for only six 
months, but already he knew how hopeless she was. He accepted the 
131 P ARADISE  
enormous Bible nonetheless and told her to leave it and the shoes at 
the desk with his name and his number. Made her write it down as 
though she might have trouble remembering ﬁve numbers in a row. 
She had brought ham sandwiches too (his letter said they could have a 
picnic-type lunch in the visitors’ quarters) but he was too nervous and 
irritated to eat. 
The other visitors seemed to be having a lovely time with their 
prisoners. Children teased each other; curled up in the arms of their 
fathers, playing with their faces, hair, ﬁngers. Women and girls 
touched the men, whispered, laughed out loud. They were the 
regulars—familiar with the bus drivers, the guards and coffee wagon 
personnel. The prisoners’ eyes were soft with pleasure. They noticed 
everything, commented on everything. The report cards little boys 
brought to them in fat brown envelopes; the barrettes in the little girls’ 
hair; the state of the women’s coats. They listened carefully to details 
of friends and family not there; had advice and instruction for every 
piece of domestic news. They seemed terribly manly to Seneca— 
leaderlike in their management of the visit. From where to sit, where 
to put the paper wrappings, to medical advice and books to send. What 
they never spoke of was what was going on inside, and they did not ever 
acknowledge the presence of the guards. Perhaps Attica was on their 
minds. 
Maybe, she thought, as his sentence wore on, Eddie would be like 
that. Not furious, victimized, as he was on this their ﬁrst visit since he 
was arraigned. Whining. Blaming. The Bible so big it embarrassed 
him. Mustard instead of mayo on the sandwiches. He didn’t want to 
hear anything about her new job at a school cafeteria. Only Sophie 
and Bernard interested him: their diets. Was she letting them out at 
night? They needed a good long run. Use their muzzles only when 
they are outside. 
She left Eddie Turtle in the visitors’ hall promising him four 
things. To send pictures of the dogs. To sell the stereo. To get his 
mother to cash the savings bonds. To call the lawyer. Send, sell, get, 
call. That’s how she would remember. 
Heading for the bus shelter, Seneca tripped and fell on one knee. 
A guard stepped forward and helped her up. 
132 Seneca  
“Watch it, there, miss.” 
“Sorry. Thanks.” 
“How you girls expect to walk in those things, I don’t know.” 
“Supposed to be good for you,” she said, smiling. 
“Where? In Holland?” He laughed pleasantly, showing two rows 
of gold ﬁllings. 
Seneca adjusted her string bag and asked him, “How far is Wichita 
from here?” 
“Depends on how you traveling. In a car it’d be—oh—ten, twelve 
hours. Bus, longer.” 
“Oh.” 
“You got family in Wichita?” 
“Yes. No. Well, my boyfriend does. I’m going to pay his mother 
a visit.” 
The guard removed his cap to smooth his crew cut. “That’s nice,” 
he said. “Good barbecue in Wichita. Make sure you get you some.” 
Somewhere in Wichita there probably was very good barbecue, 
but not in Mrs. Turtle’s house. Her house was strictly vegetarian. 
Nothing with hooves, feathers, shell or scales appeared on her table. 
Seven grains and seven greens—eat one of each (and only one) each 
day, and you lived forever. Which she planned to do, and no, she 
wasn’t about to cash in the savings bonds her husband left her for 
anybody, let alone somebody who drove a car over a child and left it 
there, even if that somebody was her only son. 
“Oh, no, Mrs. Turtle. He didn’t know it was a little kid. Eddie 
thought it was a...a... ” 
“What?” asked Mrs. Turtle. “What did he think it was?” 
“I forgot what he told me, but I know he wouldn’t do that. Eddie 
loves kids. He really does. He’s really very sweet. He asked me to bring 
him a Bible.” 
“He’s sold it by now.” 
Seneca looked away. The television screen ﬂickered. On it, grave-
faced men lied softly, courteously to each other. 
“Little girl, you’ve known him less than a growing season. I’ve 
known him all his life.” 
“Yes, m’am.” 
133 P ARADISE  
“You think I’m going to let him put me in the poorhouse so a 
slick lawyer can stay rich?” 
“No, m’am.” 
“You been watching those Watergate lawyers?” 
“No, m’am. Yes, m’am.” 
“Well, then. Don’t say another word about it. You want some 
supper or not?” 
The grain was wheat bread; the green was kale. Strong iced tea 
helped wash them both down. 
Mrs. Turtle did not offer a bed for the night, so Seneca hoisted her 
bag and walked down the quiet street in Wichita’s soft evening air. She 
had not quit her job to make this trip, but the supervisor made it clear 
that an absence this soon was not to a new employee’s advantage. Per -
haps she was already ﬁred. Maybe Mrs. Turtle would let her telephone 
her housemates to see if anyone had called to say “Don’t bother com -
ing back.” Seneca turned around, retracing her steps. 
At the door, her knuckles lifted for the knock, she heard sobbing. 
A ﬂat-out helpless mothercry—a sound like no other in the world. 
Seneca stepped back, then went to the window, pressing her left hand 
to her chest to keep her heart down. She kept it there—imagining its 
small red valves stuttering, faltering, trying to get back on line—as she 
ﬂed down the brick steps out to the sidewalk, skirting dirt streets, then 
macadam, then concrete all the way to the bus station. Only when she 
was sitting frog-legged on a molded plastic bench did she surrender to 
the wails that continued to careen in her head. Alone, without witness, 
Mrs. Turtle had let go her reason, her personality, and shrieked for all 
the world like the feathered, ﬁnned and hoofed whose ﬂesh she never 
ate—the way a gull, a cow whale, a mother wolf might if her young 
had been snatched away. Her hands had been in her hair; her mouth 
wide open in a drenched face. 
Short-breathed and dry-mouthed, Seneca escaped from the sobs. 
Rushing down broad streets and narrow, slowing when near the busi -
ness part of town. Upon entering the station she bought peanuts and 
ginger ale from the vending machines and was immediately sorry, 
since she really wanted sweet, not salt. Ankles crossed, knees spread, 
134 Seneca  
she sat on a bench in the waiting room, pocketed the nuts and sipped 
the ginger ale. Finally her panic subsided and the screams of a hurt 
woman were indistinguishable from everyday trafﬁc. 
Nighttime coming, and the station was as crowded as a morning 
commuter stop. The warm September day had not cooled when the 
sun set. There was no worthy difference between the thick air of the 
waiting room and the air outside. Passengers and their companions 
appeared calm, hardly interested in the journey or the farewell. Most 
of the children were asleep, on laps, luggage and seats. Those who 
were not tortured anyone they could. Adults ﬁngered tickets, blotted 
dampness from their necks, patted babies and murmured to each 
other. Soldiers and sweethearts examined the schedules posted behind 
glass. Four teenaged boys with stocking caps on their heads sang softly 
near the vending machines. A man in a gray chauffeur’s uniform 
strolled the ﬂoor as though looking for his passenger. A handsome man 
in a wheelchair navigated himself gracefully through the entrance, 
only slightly annoyed by the inconvenient design of the door. 
There were two hours and twenty minutes before Seneca’s bus 
departed, so she wondered if she should spend it at one of the movies 
she’d passed. Serpico, The Exorcist, The Sting, were the hot choices, 
but it felt like betrayal to see any one of them without Eddie’s arm 
around her shoulder. Thinking of his predicament and her bumbling 
efforts to help him, Seneca sighed heavily, but there was no danger of 
tears. She had not shed one even when she found Jean’s letter next to 
the Lorna Doones. Well cared for, loved, perhaps, by the mothers in 
both of the foster homes, she knew it was not her self that the mothers 
had approved of but the fact that she took reprimand quietly, ate what 
given, shared what she had and never ever cried. 
The ginger ale was rattling through the straw when the chauffeur 
stood before her and smiled. 
“Excuse me, miss. May I speak to you for a moment?” 
“Sure. I mean. Sure.” Seneca scooted over to make room on the 
bench, but he did not sit down. 
“I’m authorized to offer you ﬁve hundred dollars for some com -
plicated but quite easy work, if you’re interested.” 
135 P ARADISE  
Seneca opened her mouth to say: complicated and easy? His 
eyes were cloudy gray and the buttons on his uniform glimmered like 
ancient gold. 
“Oh, no. Thanks, but I’m on my way out of here,” she said. “My 
bus leaves in two hours.” 
“I understand. But the work won’t take long. Perhaps if you’d talk 
to my employer—she’s right outside—she can describe it to you. 
Unless, of course, you have to be somewhere in a hurry?” 
“She?” 
“Yes. Mrs. Fox. Step this way. It’ll take just a minute.” 
A limousine throbbed under bright streetlights a few yards from 
the station entrance. When the chauffeur opened the door, the head 
of a very pretty woman turned toward Seneca. 
“Hello. I’m Norma. Norma Keene Fox. I’m looking for some 
help.” She didn’t hold out her hand, but her smile made Seneca want 
her to. “Can I talk to you about it?” 
The white linen blouse she wore was sleeveless, cut low. Her beige 
skirt was long. When she uncrossed her legs, Seneca saw bright san -
dals, coral-painted toenails. Champagne-colored hair rushed back 
behind ears with no earrings. 
“What kind of help?” Seneca asked. 
“Come inside so I can explain. It’s hard talking through an open 
car door.” 
Seneca hesitated. 
Mrs. Fox’s laugh was a warm tumble of bells. “It’s okay, dear. You 
don’t have to take the job if you don’t want it.” 
“I didn’t say I didn’t.” 
“Well, then. Come. It’s cooler in here.” 
The door click was soft but profound and Mrs. Fox’s Bal à Ver -
sailles was irresistible. 
Something conﬁdential, she said. Nothing illegal, of course, just 
private. You type? A little? I want somebody not from around here. I 
hope ﬁve hundred is enough. I could go a little higher for a really 
intelligent girl. David will drive you back to the bus station, even if you 
decide not to take the job. 
136 Seneca  
Only then did Seneca realize the limousine was no longer parked. 
The interior lights were still on. The air was cooled. The limousine 
ﬂoated. 
This is a lovely part of the world, Norma continued. But narrow-
minded, if you know what I mean. Still, I wouldn’t live anywhere else. 
My husband doesn’t believe me, neither do my friends, because I’m 
from back East. When I go back there, they say Wichita? Like that. But 
I love it here. Where are you from? I thought so. They don’t wear jeans 
like that around here. They should, though, if they’ve got the bottom, I 
mean. Like you do. Yes. My son’s at Rice. Lots of people work for us, 
but it’s only when Leon is away—that’s my husband—that I can get 
anything accomplished. That’s where you come in, if you agree, I 
mean. Married? Well, what I need done only an intelligent female can 
do. You don’t wear lipstick, do you? Good. Your lips are lovely like 
that. I told David, ﬁnd an intelligent girl, please. No farmgirls. No 
dairy queens. He’s very good. He found you. Our place is out of town 
a ways. No, thank you. I can’t digest peanuts. Oh dear, you must be 
starving. We’ll have a very good supper and I’ll explain what I want 
done. Really simple if you can follow directions. It’s conﬁdential work 
so I prefer to hire a stranger rather than someone local. Are those your 
own lashes? Gracious. David? Do you know if Mattie cooked a real 
supper tonight? No ﬁsh, I hope, or do you like ﬁsh? Trout’s wonderful 
in Kansas. I think some chicken, fried, might do the trick. We have 
beautifully fed poultry here—they eat better than most people do. No, 
don’t put them away. Give them to me. Who knows? They might 
come in handy. 
Seneca spent the following three weeks in gorgeous rooms, with 
gorgeous Norma and food too pretty to eat. Norma called her many 
sweet things but not once asked what her name was. The front door 
was never locked and she could leave anytime she wanted to. She 
didn’t have to stay there, moving from peacock feathers to abject 
humiliation; from coddling to playful abuse; from caviar tartlets to 
ﬁlth. But the pain framed the pleasure, gave it edge. The humiliation 
made surrender deep, tender. Long-lasting. 
When Leon Fox telephoned his imminent return, Norma gave 
137 P ARADISE  
her the ﬁve hundred dollars and some clothes, including a cashmere 
serape. As promised, David drove her to the bus station, his buttons 
extra gleamy in the sunlight. They did not speak during the drive. 
Seneca wandered Wichita for hours, stopping in a coffee shop, 
resting in a city park. At a loss as to where to go or what to do. Get a job 
near the prison and stand by him? Meaning follow his instructions, 
apologize for not getting his mother’s savings. Go back to Chicago? 
Pick up her life-before-Eddie? Instant friends. Catch-quick jobs. Tem -
porary housing. Stolen food. Eddie Turtle had been settled life to her 
for six months, and now he was gone. Or should she just move on? 
The chauffeur had picked her up for Norma like a stray puppy. No, 
not even that. But like a pet you wanted to play with for a while—a lit -
tle while—but not keep. Not love. Not name it. Just feed it, play with 
it, then return it to its own habitat. She had ﬁve hundred dollars, and 
other than Eddie, no one knew where she was. Maybe she ought to 
keep it that way. 
Seneca hadn’t decided much of anything when she saw the ﬁrst 
place to hide—a ﬂatbed loaded with cement sacks. When she was 
discovered the driver held her against a tire, splicing his questions, 
curses and threats with mild ﬂirtations. Seneca said nothing at ﬁrst, 
then suddenly begged permission to go to the bathroom. “I have to go. 
Bad,” she said. The driver sighed and released her, shouting a ﬁnal 
warning at her back. She hitched a few times after that but so disliked 
the necessary talk she accepted the risk of stowing away in trucks. She 
preferred traveling resolutely nowhere, closed off from society, hidden 
among quiet cargo—no one knowing she was there. When she found 
herself among crates in a brand-new ’73 pickup, jumping out of it to 
follow a coatless woman was the ﬁrst pointedly uninstructed thing she 
had ever done. 
The sobbing—or was she giggling?—woman was gone now. The 
snow had stopped. Downstairs, someone was calling her name. 
“Seneca? Seneca? Come on, baby. We’re waiting for you.” 
138 DIVINE  “Let me tell you about love, that silly word you believe is about 
whether you like somebody or whether somebody likes you or 
whether you can put up with somebody in order to get something or 
someplace you want or you believe it has to do with how your body 
responds to another body like robins or bison or maybe you believe 
love is how forces or nature or luck is benign to you in particular not 
maiming or killing you but if so doing it for your own good. 
“Love is none of that. There is nothing in nature like it. Not in 
robins or bison or in the banging tails of your hunting dogs and not in 
blossoms or suckling foal. Love is divine only and difﬁcult always. If 
you think it is easy you are a fool. If you think it is natural you are 
blind. It is a learned application without reason or motive except that it 
is God. 
“You do not deserve love regardless of the suffering you have 
endured. You do not deserve love because somebody did you wrong. 
You do not deserve love just because you want it. You can only earn— 
by practice and careful contemplation—the right to express it and you 
have to learn how to accept it. Which is to say you have to earn God. 
You have to practice God. You have to think God—carefully. And if 
you are a good and diligent student you may secure the right to show 
love. Love is not a gift. It is a diploma. A diploma conferring certain 
privileges: the privilege of expressing love and the privilege of receiv -
ing it. 
“How do you know you have graduated? You don’t. What you do 
know is that you are human and therefore educable, and therefore 
141 P ARADISE  
capable of learning how to learn, and therefore interesting to God, 
who is interested only in Himself which is to say He is interested only 
in love. Do you understand me? God is not interested in you. He is 
interested in love and the bliss it brings to those who understand and 
share that interest. 
“Couples that enter the sacrament of marriage and are not pre -
pared to go the distance or are not willing to get right with the real love 
of God cannot thrive. They may cleave together like robins or gulls or 
anything else that mates for life. But if they eschew this mighty course, 
at the moment when all are judged for the disposition of their eternal 
lives, their cleaving won’t mean a thing. God bless the pure and holy. 
Amen.” 
Some of the amens that accompanied and followed Reverend 
Senior Pulliam’s words were loud, others withholding; some people 
did not open their mouths at all. The question, thought Anna, was not 
why but who. Who was Pulliam blasting? Was he directing his remarks 
to the young people, warning them to shape up their selﬁsh lives? 
Or was he aiming at their parents for allowing the juvenile restless -
ness and deﬁance that had been rankling him even before that ﬁst 
appeared on the Oven? Most likely, she thought, he was bringing the 
weight of his large and long Methodist education to bear down on 
Richard. A stone to crush his colleague’s message of God as a perma -
nent interior engine that, once ignited, roared, purred and moved you 
to do your own work as well as His—but, if idle, rusted, immobilizing 
the soul like a frozen clutch. 
That must be it, she thought. Pulliam was targeting Misner. 
Because surely he would not stand before the bride and groom—a 
guest preacher asked to make a few (few!) remarks before the cere -
mony to a congregation made up of almost everybody in Ruby, only a 
third of whom were members of Pulliam’s church—and frighten them 
to death on their wedding day. Because surely he would not insult the 
bride’s mother and sister-in-law, who wore like a coat the melancholy 
of tending broken babies and who not only had not chastised God 
for that knockout blow to everything they dreamed of but seemed to 
increase in steadfastness as each year passed. And although the groom 
had no living parents, surely Pulliam did not intend to embarrass his 
142 Divine  
aunts—to put the feet of those devout women to the ﬁre for caring (too 
much, perhaps?) for the sole “son” the family would ever have, now 
that Soane’s boys were dead, Dovey having had none, and not allowing 
mourning for either of those losses to tear them up or close their hearts. 
Surely not. And surely Pulliam was not trying to rile the groom’s 
uncles, Deacon and Steward, who behaved as if God were their silent 
business partner. Pulliam had always seemed to admire them, hinting 
repeatedly that they belonged in Zion, not Calvary, where they had to 
listen to the namby-pamby sermons of a man who thought teaching 
was letting children talk as if they had something important to say that 
the world had not heard and dealt with already. 
Who else would feel the sting of “God is not interested in you.” Or 
wince from the burn in “if you think love is natural you are blind.” 
Who else but Richard Misner who now had to stand up and preside, 
over the most anticipated wedding anyone could remember, under the 
boiling breath of Senior “Take No Prisoners” Pulliam? Unless, of 
course, he was talking to her, telling her: Cleave unto another if you 
want, but if you are not cleaving to God (Pulliam’s God, that is) your 
marriage will not be worth the license. Because he knew she and 
Richard were talking marriage, and he knew she helped him organize 
the young disobedients. “Be the Furrow.” 
Rogue mint overwhelmed the ﬂower arrangements around the 
altar. Clumps of it, along with a phlox called wild sweet william, grew 
beneath the church windows that at eleven o’clock were opened to 
a climbing sun. The light falling from the April sky was a gift. Inside 
the church the maplewood pews, burnished to a military glow, set off 
the spring-white walls, the understated pulpit, the comfortable almost 
picket-fence look of the railing, where communicants could kneel to 
welcome the spirit one more time. Above the altar, high into its clean, 
clear space, hung a three-foot oak cross. Uncluttered. Unencumbered. 
No gold competed with its perfection or troubled its poise. No writhe 
or swoon of the body of Christ bloated its lyric thunder. 
The women of Ruby did not powder their faces and they wore 
no harlot’s perfume. So the voluptuous odor of mint and sweet wil -
liam disturbed the congregation, made it reel in anticipation of a good 
time with plenty good food at Soane Morgan’s house. There would be 
143 P ARADISE  
music by anyone: July on the upright piano; the Male Chorus; a 
Kate Golightly solo; the Holy Redeemer Quartet; a dreamy-eyed boy 
named Brood on the steps with a mouth organ. There would be the 
press of good clothing; silk dresses and starched shirts forgotten as folks 
leaned against trees, sat on the grass, mishandled second helpings of 
cream peas. There would be the shouts of sugar-drunk children; the 
crackle of wedding gift paper snatched from the ﬂoor and folded so 
neatly it seemed more valuable than the gift it had enclosed. Farmers, 
ranchers and wheat-growing women would let themselves be yanked 
from chairs and clapped into repeating dance steps from long ago. 
Teenagers would laugh and blink their eyes in an effort to hide their 
want. 
But more than joy and children high on wedding cake, they were 
looking forward to the union of two families and an end to the animus 
that had soaked the members and friends of those families for four 
years. Animus that centered on the maybe-baby the bride had not 
acknowledged, announced or delivered. 
Now they sat, as did Anna Flood, wondering what on earth Rev -
erend Pulliam thought he was doing. Why cast a pall now? Why 
diminish the odor of rogue mint and phlox; blunt the taste of the roast 
lamb and lemon pies awaiting them. Why fray the harmony, derail the 
peace this marriage brought? 
Richard Misner rose from his seat. Annoyed; no, angry. So angry 
he could not look at his fellow preacher and let him see how deep the 
cut. Throughout Pulliam’s remarks he had gazed expressionless at the 
Easter hats of the women in the pews. Earlier that morning he had 
planned ﬁve or six opening sentences to launch the sacred rite of mat -
rimony, crafted them carefully around Revelation 19:7,9, sharpening 
the “marriage supper of the Lamb” image, coring it to reveal the rec -
onciliation this wedding promised. He had segued from Revelation 
to Matthew 19:6, “Wherefore they are no more twain, but one ﬂesh,” 
to seal not only the couple’s ﬁdelity to each other but the renewed 
responsibilities of all Morgans and Fleetwoods. 
Now he looked at the couple standing patiently before the altar 
and wondered whether they had understood or even heard what had 
been laid on them. He, however, did understand. Knew this lethal 
144 Divine  
view of his chosen work was a deliberate assault on all he believed. 
Suddenly he understood and shared Augustine’s rage at the “proud 
minister” whom he ranked with the devil. Augustine had gone on to 
say that God’s message was not corrupted by the messenger; “if [the 
light] should pass through deﬁled beings, it is not itself deﬁled.” 
Although Augustine had not met Senior Pulliam, he must have known 
ministers like him. But his dismissal of them to Satan’s company did 
not acknowledge the damage words spoken from a pulpit could wreak. 
What would Augustine say as anodyne to the poison Pulliam had just 
sprayed over everything? Over the heads of men ﬁnding it so hard to 
ﬁght their instincts to control what they could and crunch what they 
could not; in the hearts of women tirelessly taming the predator; in 
the faces of children not yet recovered from the blow to their esteem 
upon learning that adults would not regard them as humans until they 
mated; of the bride and groom frozen there, desperate for this public 
bonding to dilute their private shame. Misner knew that Pulliam’s 
words were a widening of the war he had declared on Misner’s activi -
ties: tempting the young to step outside the wall, outside the town 
limits, shepherding them, forcing them to transgress, to think of them -
selves as civil warriors. He knew also that a public secret about a never-
born baby poked through the grounds of the quarrel like a fang. 
Suitable language came to mind but, not trusting himself to 
deliver it without revealing his deep personal hurt, Misner walked 
away from the pulpit, to the rear wall of the church. There he 
stretched, reaching up until he was able to unhook the cross that 
hung there. He carried it then, past the empty choir stall, past the 
organ where Kate sat, the chair where Pulliam was, on to the podium 
and held it before him for all to see—if only they would. See what was 
certainly the ﬁrst sign any human anywhere had made: the vertical 
line; the horizontal one. Even as children, they drew it with their ﬁn -
gers in snow, sand or mud; they laid it down as sticks in dirt; arranged it 
from bones on frozen tundra and broad savannas; as pebbles on river -
banks; scratched it on cave walls and outcroppings from Nome to 
South Africa. Algonquin and Laplanders, Zulu and Druids—all had a 
ﬁnger memory of this original mark. The circle was not ﬁrst, nor was 
the parallel or the triangle. It was this mark, this, that lay underneath 
145 P ARADISE  
every other. This mark, rendered in the placement of facial features. 
This mark of a standing human ﬁgure poised to embrace. Remove it, 
as Pulliam had done, and Christianity was like any and every religion 
in the world: a population of supplicants begging respite from 
begrudging authority; harried believers ducking fate or dodging every -
day evil; the weak negotiating a doomed trek through the wilderness; 
the sighted ripped of light and thrown into the perpetual dark of 
choicelessness. Without this sign, the believer’s life was conﬁned to 
praising God and taking the hits. The praise was credit; the hits were 
interest due on a debt that could never be paid. Or, as Pulliam put it, 
no one knew when he had “graduated.” But with it, in the religion in 
which this sign was paramount and foundational, well, life was a 
whole other matter. 
See? The execution of this one solitary black man propped up on 
these two intersecting lines to which he was attached in a parody of 
human embrace, fastened to two big sticks that were so convenient, so 
recognizable, so embedded in consciousness as consciousness, being 
both ordinary and sublime. See? His woolly head alternately rising on 
his neck and falling toward his chest, the glow of his midnight skin 
dimmed by dust, streaked by gall, fouled by spit and urine, gone 
pewter in the hot, dry wind and, ﬁnally, as the sun dimmed in shame, 
as his ﬂesh matched the odd lessening of afternoon light as though it 
were evening, always sudden in that climate, swallowing him and the 
other death row felons, and the silhouette of this original sign merged 
with a false night sky. See how this ofﬁcial murder out of hundreds 
marked the difference; moved the relationship between God and man 
from CEO and supplicant to one on one? The cross he held was 
abstract; the absent body was real, but both combined to pull humans 
from backstage to the spotlight, from muttering in the wings to the 
principal role in the story of their lives. This execution made it possible 
to respect—freely, not in fear—one’s self and one another. Which was 
what love was: unmotivated respect. All of which testiﬁed not to a 
peevish Lord who was His own love but to one who enabled human 
love. Not for His own glory—never. God loved the way humans loved 
one another; loved the way humans loved themselves; loved the genius 
on the cross who managed to do both and die knowing it. 
146 Divine  
But Richard Misner could not speak calmly of these things. So he 
stood there and let the minutes tick by as he held the crossed oak in his 
hands, urging it to say what he could not: that not only is God inter -
ested in you; He is you. 
Would they see? Would they? 
For those who could see it, the groom’s face was a study. He looked up 
at the cross Reverend Misner was holding holding holding. Saying 
nothing, just holding it there in locked time while the unendurable 
silence was sprinkled with coughs and soft, encouraging grunts. Peo -
ple were already nervous about his wedding because buzzards had 
been seen ﬂying north over the town. The question in their minds was 
whether that was an omen for harm (they circled the town) or for good 
(none landed). Simpletons, he thought. If this marriage was doomed, 
it had nothing to do with birds. 
Suddenly the open windows were not enough. The groom began 
to perspire in his beautifully cut black suit. Anger shot through him 
like a .32. Why was everybody using his wedding, messing up his cere -
mony, to extend a quarrel he could care less about? He wanted it over. 
Over and done with so his uncles would shut up; so Jeff and Fleet 
would stop spreading lies about him, so he could take his place among 
the married and propertied men of Ruby, so he could burn all those 
letters from Arnette. But especially so he could ﬂush that Gigi bitch 
out of his life completely. Like sugar turning from unreasonable 
delight to the body’s mortal enemy, his craving for her had poisoned 
him, rendered him diabetic, stupid, helpless. Following months of 
risky sweetness, she had become indifferent, bored, even hateful. In 
tall corn he had waited for her; in moonlight he had crept behind hen -
houses to meet her; spent money that was not his to entertain her; lied 
to get something other than a truck to drive her; planted a marijuana 
crop for her; carried ice in August heat to cool the inside of her thighs; 
bought her a battery-powered radio she adored, a chenille robe she 
laughed at. Most of all he had loved her for years, an aching, humiliat -
ing, self-loathing love that drifted from pining to stealth. 
He had read the ﬁrst letter he got from Arnette but put the others 
147 P ARADISE  
in a shoe box in his aunt’s attic; he was in a hurry to destroy them 
(or maybe even read them) before anybody discovered the eleven 
unopened envelopes posted from Langston, Oklahoma. He assumed 
they were all about love and grief, love in spite of grief. Whatever. But 
what could Arnette know of either the way he did? Had she sat through 
the night in a copse of shin oak to catch a glimpse? Had she trailed a 
beat-up Cadillac all the way to Demby just to see? Had she been 
thrown out of a house by women? Cursed by women? And still, still 
been unable to stay away? Not, that is, until his uncles sat him down 
and gave him the law and its consequences. 
So here he was, standing at the altar, his elbow supporting the thin 
wrist of his bride, in his pocket the fold of Easter palm she had given 
him for protection. He was aware of the heavy breathing of his soon-to-
be brother-in-law at his right; and the animosity of Billie Delia burrow -
ing into the back of his head. He was certain it would go on forever, 
this blocked rage, because Misner seemed to be struck dumb by the 
cross he held. 
A cross the bride gazed at in terror. And she had been so happy. At 
last so very very happy. Free of the bleak sadness that encased her as 
soon as she was home from college: the unrelenting suffocation in her 
parents’ house; the brand-new disgust that accompanied the care of 
her broken nieces and nephews; the need for sleep that alarmed her 
mother, annoyed her sister-in-law and infuriated her brother and 
father; the ﬂat-out nothing-to-doness, interrupted only by wonder and 
worry about K.D. Although he had never answered her ﬁrst twelve 
letters, she’d kept on writing, but not mailing, forty more. One a week 
for the whole ﬁrst year she was away. She believed she loved him 
absolutely because he was all she knew about her self—which was to 
say, everything she knew of her body was connected to him. Except for 
Billie Delia, no one had told her there was any other way to think of 
herself. Not her mother; not her sister-in-law. Last year, when she was a 
senior she came home for Easter break and he asked to see her, came 
twice for dinner, took her to Nathan DuPres’ ranch to help with the 
Children’s Day picnic, and then suggested they get married. It was a 
miracle that lasted all the way down to this brilliant day in April. Every -
thing perfect: her period had come and gone; her gown, made entirely 
148 Divine  
of Soane Morgan’s lace, was heavenly; the gold band tucked into 
her brother’s vest was engraved with both their initials entwined. The 
hole in her heart had closed ﬁnally, and now, at the last minute, the 
preacher was rocking strange, trying to hold up the marriage, distort, 
maybe even destroy it. Standing there, his face like granite, holding a 
cross as though nobody had ever seen one before. She pressed her ﬁn -
gers into the arm that held hers, willing Misner to get on with it. Say it, 
say it! “Dearly Beloved, we are gathered here . . . we are gathered 
here.” Suddenly, soundlessly, in the mufﬂed silence that Misner 
imposed, a tiny rent opened in exactly the place where her heart’s hole 
had been. She held her breath and felt the increase, like a run in a 
stocking. Soon the little tear would yawn, stretch wide, wider, sapping 
all her strength until it got what it needed to seal itself and permit the 
heart to go on beating. She was acquainted with it, had thought marry -
ing K.D. would permanently heal it, but now, waiting for “We are 
gathered here . . . ,”  anxious for “Do you take thi s..., ” she knew bet -
ter. Knew exactly what was and would always be missing. 
Say it, please, she urged. Please. And hurry. Hurry. I’ve got things 
to do. 
Billie Delia shifted her bouquet from her left hand to her right. Tiny 
thorns pricked through her white cotton gloves and the freesia blos -
soms were closing as she’d known they would. Only the tea roses 
remained sturdy with promises you could count on to be kept. She had 
suggested baby’s breath to ﬂatter the yellow buds but was astonished to 
ﬁnd that not one garden had any. No baby’s breath anywhere. Then 
yarrow, she said, but the bride refused to carry to her wedding a weed 
that cattle ate. So there they were, both of them, holding water-hungry 
freesia and tea roses improperly dethorned. Other than the damage 
being done to her palms, the wait Reverend Misner was forcing on 
everybody did not bother or surprise her. It was just one more piece of 
foolishness that made up this foolish wedding that everybody thought 
was a cease-ﬁre. But the war was not between the Morgans, the Fleet-
woods and those who sided with either. It was true that Jeff had taken 
to carrying a handgun; that Steward Morgan and Arnold Fleetwood 
149 P ARADISE  
had shouted at each other in the street; that people wandered into 
Anna Flood’s back room to lounge in Menus’ barbershop not for hair -
cuts but to grunt and sigh over the rumor of an outrage that had taken 
place out at the Convent; that based on this gossip Reverend Pulliam 
had preached a sermon taken from Jeremiah 1:5: “Before I formed 
thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou camest forth out of 
the womb I sanctiﬁed thee.” Reverend Misner countered with Paul’s 
words to the Corinthians: “ . . . the greatest of these is love.” But to 
Billie Delia the real battle was not about infant life or a bride’s reputa -
tion but about disobedience, which meant, of course, the stallions 
were ﬁghting about who controlled the mares and their foals. Senior 
Pulliam had scripture and history on his side. Misner had scripture 
and the future on his. Now, she supposed, he was making the world 
wait until it understood his position. 
Billie Delia lowered her gaze from Misner’s searching eyes to the 
heavy lace on the bride’s head to the back of the groom’s neck and 
thought immediately of a horse she once loved. Although it was the 
groom who held in his name the memory of a legendary horse race, it 
was she whose life had been maimed by it. Hard Goods, the winning 
horse that K.D. had ridden when Ruby was founded, belonged to Mr. 
Nathan DuPres. Years after that race but before she could walk, Mr. 
Nathan had hoisted her on Hard Goods’ bare back, which she rode 
with such glee it made everybody laugh. From then on, every month 
or so, when he came into town on errands, he unsaddled the horse and 
led it around the schoolyard next to her house, holding her waist with 
the palm of his hand. “Mount up these children,” he would say. “Need 
more horsewomen in this land. Everybody crying for a motorcar better 
mount up their children early! Hard Goods ain’t never had a ﬂat!” It 
continued until Billie Delia was three years old—too little, still, for 
everyday underwear, and nobody noticed or cared how perfect her 
skin felt against that wide expanse of rhythmically moving animal 
ﬂesh. While she struggled to grip Hard Goods with her ankles and 
endure the rub of his spine, the grown-ups smiled, taking pleasure in 
her pleasure while calling Mr. Nathan a retrograde Negro who needed 
to learn how to shift gears so he could get somewhere on time. Then 
one day. A Sunday. Hard Goods came loping down the street with Mr. 
150 Divine  
Nathan astride. Billie Delia, who hadn’t seen horse or rider for a long 
while, ran toward them, begging for a lift. Mr. Nathan promised to stop 
by after service. Still in her Sunday clothes, she waited in her yard. 
When she saw him coming, negotiating space among the after-church 
crowd, she ran out into the middle of Central Avenue, where she 
pulled down her Sunday panties before raising her arms to be lifted 
onto Hard Goods’ back. 
Things seemed to crumple after that. She got an unintelligible 
whipping from her mother and a dose of shame it took her years to 
understand. That’s when the teasing began, more merciless because 
her mother was the teacher. Suddenly there was a dark light in the eyes 
of boys who felt comfortable staring at her. Suddenly a curious bracing 
in the women, a looking-away look in the men. And a permanent 
watchfulness in her mother. Nathan DuPres did not make her another 
offer. Hard Goods was lost to her forever, remembered publicly as the 
horse that won the race with K.D. on his back, privately as the recipi -
ent of a little girl’s shame. Only Mrs. Dovey Morgan and her sister, 
Soane, treated her with easy kindness—stopping her in the street to 
adjust the bow in her braids, praising her work in their kitchen gar -
dens; and once when Mrs. Dovey Morgan stopped her to wipe what 
she thought was makeup from Billie Delia’s rosy lips, she did it with a 
smile and no hateful lecture. Even apologized when her handkerchief 
came away clean. If it had not been for them and Anna Flood’s return 
her teens would have been unlivable. Nor did Anna or the Morgan 
ladies make her feel the freakishness of being an only child—perhaps 
because they had few or no children themselves. Most families boasted 
nine, eleven, even ﬁfteen children. And it was inevitable that she and 
Arnette, who had no sisters and just one brother, become best friends. 
She knew people took her for the wild one, the one who from the 
beginning not only had no qualms about pressing her nakedness on a 
horse’s back but preferred it, would drop her drawers in public on Sun -
day just to get to the thrill of it. Although it was Arnette who had sex at 
fourteen (with the groom), Billie Delia carried the burden. She 
quickly learned the cautionary look in the eyes of girls whose mothers 
had warned them away from Billie Delia. In fact she was untouched. 
So far. Since she was helplessly in love with a pair of brothers, her vir -
151 P ARADISE  
ginity, which no one believed existed, had become as mute as the cross 
Reverend Misner was holding aloft. 
Now his eyes were closed. His jaw muscles working overtime. He 
held the cross as though it were a hammer he was trying not to bring 
down lest it hurt somebody. Billie Delia wished he would open his 
eyes again, look at the groom and bust him over the head with it. But 
no. That would embarrass the bride who had won, ﬁnally, the husband 
her maid of honor despised. A husband who had propositioned Billie 
Delia before and after his thing with Arnette. A husband who, while 
Arnette was away, had forgotten all about her and chased any dress 
whose wearer was under ﬁfty. A husband who had left his future bride 
pregnant and on her own, knowing that it was the unmarried mother-
to-be (not the father-to-be) who would have to ask her church’s forgive -
ness. Billie Delia had heard of such things, but any girl who got 
pregnant in Ruby could count on marriage, whether the boy was eager 
or not, because he still had to live near her family and with his own. 
Still had to meet her in church or anywhere else he turned. But not 
this groom. This groom let the bride suffer for four years and con -
sented to a wedding only when he was kicked out of another woman’s 
bed. Kicked so hard he couldn’t get to the altar fast enough. She 
remembered vividly the day the kicker had arrived in shoes already 
designed for the groom’s behind. Billie Delia’s hatred of the strange-
looking girl was instant and would have been eternal had she not 
taken refuge in the Convent herself one chilly October day after a 
quarrel with her mother turned ugly. Her mother fought her like a 
man that day. She had run to Anna Flood, who told her to wait upstairs 
while she dealt with some deliveryman business. Billie Delia cried 
alone for what seemed like hours, licking her split lip and touching the 
swelling under her eye. When she spied Apollo’s truck, she slipped 
down the back stairs, and while he was buying soda pop, she got into 
the cab. Neither of them knew what to do. Apollo offered to take her 
out to his family’s place. But ashamed of having to explain her face to 
his parents and put up with the stares of any one of his twelve brothers 
and sisters, she asked him to drive her out to the Convent. That was 
the fall of 1973. What she saw and learned there changed her forever. 
152 Divine  
Agreeing to be Arnette’s maid of honor was the last sentimental thing 
she would ever do in Ruby. She got a job in Demby, bought a car and 
probably would have driven it to Saint Louis, except for her helpless 
double love. 
With or without chaw in his mouth, Steward was not a patient man. So 
he was surprised to ﬁnd himself calm watching Misner’s behavior. All 
around him the congregation had begun to murmur, exchange looks, 
but Steward, believing he was less confounded than they were, did nei -
ther in spite of no soothing wad of tobacco. As a small boy, he had lis -
tened to Big Daddy describe a sixty-ﬁve-mile journey he’d taken to 
bring supplies back to Haven. It was 1920. State prohibition was now 
national. A sickness called rocking pneumonia gripped Haven and Big 
Daddy was one of the few able bodies able to go. He went alone. On 
horseback. He got what he needed in Logan County, and with the 
medicines bundled under his coat, the other supplies tied to the horse, 
he lost his way and found himself after sunset unsure of which way to 
go. He smelled, but could not see, a campﬁre that seemed to be fairly 
close by on his left. Then suddenly, to his right, he heard whoops, 
music and gunshots. But he saw no lights in that direction. Stuck 
in darkness with invisible strangers on both sides, he had to decide 
whether to ride toward the smoke and meat smells or toward the music 
and guns. Or neither. The campﬁre might be warming robbers; the 
music might be amusing lynchers. His horse decided. Smelling others 
of its kind it trotted toward the campﬁre. There Big Daddy found three 
Sac and Fox men sitting near a ﬁre hidden in a hole. He dismounted, 
approached carefully, hat in hand, and said, “Evening.” The men wel -
comed him and, learning of his destination, warned him against enter -
ing the town. The women there ﬁght with their ﬁsts, they said; the 
children are drunk; the men don’t argue or debate but speak only with 
ﬁrearms; liquor laws don’t apply. They had come to rescue a family 
member, who had been drinking in there for twelve days. Already one 
of them was in there, searching for him. What’s the name of the town? 
Big Daddy asked. Pura Sangre, they answered. At its northern edge 
153 P ARADISE  
was a sign: No Niggers. At its southern edge a cross. Big Daddy spent 
several hours with them and, before light, thanked them and left— 
backtracking to ﬁnd his way home. 
When Steward heard the story the ﬁrst time, he could not close 
his mouth, thinking of that moment when his father was all alone in 
the dark, guns to the right, strangers to the left. But the grown-ups 
laughed and thought of something else. “No niggers at one end, a 
cross at the other and the devil loose in between.” Steward didn’t get it. 
How could the devil be anywhere near a cross? What was the connec -
tion between the two signs? Since that time, however, he had seen 
crosses between the titties of whores; military crosses spread for miles; 
crosses on ﬁre in Negroes’ yards, crosses tattooed on the forearms of 
dedicated killers. He had seen a cross dangling from the rearview mir -
ror of a car full of whites come to insult the little girls of Ruby. What -
ever Reverend Misner was thinking, he was wrong. A cross was no 
better than the bearer. Now Steward ﬁngered his mustache aware of 
his twin shifting his feet, getting ready to grab the pew in front of him 
and put a stop to Misner’s behavior. 
Soane, sitting next to Deek, listening to his heavy breathing, under -
stood how grave her mistake. She was about to touch her husband on 
the arm to caution him from rising, when Misner lowered the cross at 
last and spoke the opening words of the ceremony. Deek sat back and 
cleared his sinuses, but the damage was done. They were right back 
where they’d started when Jefferson Fleetwood pulled a gun on K.D.; 
when Menus had to interrupt a pushing match between Steward and 
Arnold. And when Mable had sent no cake to the All Church Bake 
Sale. The peace and goodwill summoned by the announcement of 
the marriage were now shattered. The reception at her house would be 
a further digest of the problem, and most disturbing, Soane, unbe -
knownst to others, had made the mistake of inviting Connie and the 
Convent girls to the wedding reception. Having misread the warning, 
she was about to hostess one of the biggest messes Ruby had ever seen. 
Both of her dead sons were leaning against the Kelvinator, cracking 
the shells of Spanish peanuts. “What’s that in the sink?” Easter asked 
154 Divine  
her. She looked and saw feathers—brightly colored but small like 
chicken feathers—lying in a heap in her sink. It made her wonder: she 
hadn’t killed or plucked any fowl and would never have put feathers 
there. “I don’t know,” she answered. “You should gather them up, 
Mama,” Scout told her. “That’s no place for them, you know.” They 
both laughed and crunched the nuts. She woke wondering what kind 
of bird was colored that way. When pairs and pairs of buzzards ﬂew 
over the town, she thought that was the signiﬁcance of the dream: that 
no matter what, this marriage would ﬁx nothing. Now she believed her 
sons had tried to tell her something else: she’d been concentrating on 
the colors, while the point was the sink. “That’s no place for them, you 
know.” The strange feathers she had invited did not belong in her 
house. 
When ﬁnally Kate Golightly touched the organ keys and the cou -
ple turned around to face the congregation, Soane cried. Partly at the 
sad bright smiles of the bride and groom, partly in dread of the malice, 
set roaming now, and on its way to her house. 
It had long been noticed that the Morgan brothers seldom spoke to 
or looked at each other. Some believed it was because they were jeal -
ous of one another; that their views only seemed to be uniform; that 
down deep was a mutual resentment which surfaced in small ways. In 
their automobile arguments, for example: one’s ﬁerce preference for 
Chevrolets, the other’s stubborn defense of Oldsmobiles. In fact the 
brothers not only agreed on almost everything; they were in eternal if 
silent conversation. Each knew the other’s thoughts as well as he knew 
his face and only once in a while needed the conﬁrmation of a glance. 
Now they stood in different rooms of Deek’s house, thinking 
the same thing. Fortunately, Misner was late, Menus sober, Pulliam 
triumphant and Jeff preoccupied with Sweetie. Mable, who had 
attended the ceremony, had relieved her daughter-in-law for the 
reception. The wedding couple were in line—glazed smiles in place, 
but in line nevertheless. Pastor Cary—soothing and jovial—was the 
best bet for keeping things steady. He and his wife, Lily, were treasured 
for their duets, and if they could get some music goin g... 
155 P ARADISE  
Steward opened the piano while Deek moved through the guests. 
As he passed Reverend Pulliam, nodding and smiling with Sweetie 
and Jeff, Deek gave him a reassuring pat on the shoulder. In the dining 
room the food table drew appreciative murmurs but as yet no takers 
except children. The coos over the gift table seemed strained, exces -
sive. Steward waited at the piano, his steel-gray hair and innocent eyes 
in perfect balance. The children around him shone like agate; the 
women were brilliant but quiet in their still fresh Easter clothes; the 
men’s squeaky new shoes glistened like melon seeds. Everyone was 
stiff, overly polite. Deek must be having trouble persuading the Carys, 
he thought. Steward reached for tobacco, silently urging his twin to 
try somebody else—the Male Chorus, Kate Golightly—quick before 
Pulliam took it in his head to pray them back into battle stations or, 
Lord help us, Jeff began reciting his VA grievances. Once that started 
his next target would be K.D. who had never served in the military. 
Where is Soane? he wondered. Steward could see Dovey unpinning 
the veil from the bride’s hair and his innocent eyes enjoyed his wife’s 
ﬁgure once more. In anything—Sunday dress, white church uniform 
or even his own bathrobe—the look of her body made him smile with 
satisfaction. But Deek was cautioning him now about distraction, so 
Steward left off admiring Dovey and saw the success of his brother’s 
efforts. Kate came toward the piano and sat down. She ﬂexed her 
ﬁngers and began to play. First a preparatory trill, accompanied by 
friendly coughs and murmurs of anticipation. Then Simon and Lily 
Cary arrived, humming, humming, while they considered what to 
begin with. They were a third of the way into “Precious Lord, take my 
hand,” smiles had turned toward the direction of the music, when they 
heard the horn blast of an ancient Cadillac. 
Connie did not come, but her boarders did. Mavis drove the Cadillac, 
with Gigi and Seneca in the back and a somebody new in the passen -
ger seat. None of them was dressed for a wedding. They piled out of 
the car looking like go-go girls: pink shorts, skimpy tops, see-through 
skirts; painted eyes, no lipstick; obviously no underwear, no stockings. 
Jezebel’s storehouse raided to decorate arms, earlobes, necks, ankles 
156 Divine  
and even a nostril. Mavis and Soane, greeting each other on the lawn, 
were uncomfortable. Two other women sauntered into the dining 
room and surveyed the food tables. They said “Hi” and wondered 
aloud if there was anything other than lemonade and punch to drink. 
There wasn’t, so they did what a few other young people had already 
done: drifted out of the Morgans’ yard and strolled past Anna Flood’s 
store to the Oven. The few local girls already there clumped together 
and withdrew, leaving the territory to the Poole boys: Apollo, Brood 
and Hurston. To the Seawrights: Timothy Jr. and Spider. To Destry, 
Vane and Royal. Menus joined them, but Jeff, to whom he had been 
speaking, did not. Neither did the watching groom. Dovey was remov -
ing the fat from a lamb slice when the music hit. She cut her ﬁnger in 
the blare and sucked it when Otis Redding screamed “Awwwww, lil 
girl . . . ,”  o bliterating the hymn’s quiet plea. Inside, outside and on 
down the road the beat and the heat were ruthless. 
“Oh, they’re just having fun,” a voice behind Reverend Pulliam 
whispered. He turned to look but could not locate the speaker, so he 
continued glaring out of the window. He knew about such women. 
Like children, always on the lookout for fun, devoted to it but always 
needing a break in order to have it. A lift, a hand, a ﬁve-dollar bill. 
Somebody to excuse or coddle them. Somebody to look down at the 
ground and say nothing when they disturbed the peace. He exchanged 
glances with his wife who nodded and left the window. She knew, as 
he did, that fun-obsessed adults were clear signs of already advanced 
decay. Soon the whole country would be awash in toys, tone-deaf from 
raucous music and hollow laughter. But not here. Not in Ruby. Not 
while Senior Pulliam was alive. 
The Convent girls are dancing; throwing their arms over their heads, 
they do this and that and then the other. They grin and yip but look at 
no one. Just their own rocking bodies. The local girls look over their 
shoulders and snort. Brood, Apollo and Spider, steel-muscled farm 
boys with sophisticated eyes, sway and snap their ﬁngers. Hurston sings 
accompaniment. Two small girls ride their bikes over; wide-eyed, they 
watch the dancing women. One of them, with amazing hair, asks can 
157 P ARADISE  
she borrow a bike. Then another. They ride the bikes down Central 
Avenue with no regard for what the breeze does to their long ﬂowered 
skirts or how pumping pedals plumped their breasts. One coasts with 
her ankles on the handlebars. Another rides the handlebars with Brood 
on the seat behind her. One, in the world’s shortest pink shorts, is 
seated on a bench, arms wrapped around herself. She looks drunk. Are 
they all? The boys laugh. 
Anna and Kate carried their plates to the edge of Soane’s garden. 
“Which one?” whispered Anna. 
“That one there,” said Kate. “The one with the rag for a blouse.” 
“That’s a halter,” said Anna. 
“Halter? Looks like a starter to me.” 
“She the one K.D. was messing with?” 
“Yep.” 
“I know that one there. She comes in the store. Who the other 
two?” 
“Beats me.” 
“Look. There goes Billie Delia.” 
“Naturally.” 
“Oh, come on, Kate. Leave Billie alone.” 
They spooned potato salad into their mouths. Behind them came 
Alice Pulliam, murmuring, “My, my, my-my-my.” 
“Hello, Aunt Alice,” said Kate. 
“Have you ever in your life seen such carrying on? Bet you can’t 
locate one brassiere in the whole bunch.” Alice held the crown of her 
hat in the breeze. “Why’re you all smiling? I don’t think this is the least 
bit funny.” 
“No. Course not,” said Kate. 
“This is a wedding, remember?” 
“You’re right, Aunt Alice. I said you right.” 
“How would you like to have somebody dancing nasty at your 
wedding?” Alice’s bright black eyes searched Anna’s hair. 
Kate nodded sympathetically while pressing her lips tight so no 
smile could seep through them. Anna tried to look seriously affronted 
158 Divine  
before this stern preacher’s wife, thinking: Dear Jesus, I wouldn’t last 
an hour in this town if I married Richard. 
“I’m going to have to get Pastor himself to stop this,” Alice said, 
and moved resolutely off toward Soane’s house. 
Anna and Kate waited several beats before setting their laughter 
free. Whatever else, thought Anna, the Convent women had saved the 
day. Nothing like other folks’ sins for distraction. The young people 
were wrong. Be the Furrow of Her Brow. Speaking of which, where 
was Richard anyway? 
Down on his knees, Richard Misner was angry at his anger, and at 
his mishandling of it. Used to obstacles, adept at disagreement, he 
could not reconcile the level of his present fury with what seemed to 
be its source. He loved God so much it hurt, although that same love 
sometimes made him laugh out loud. And he deeply respected his col -
leagues. For centuries they had held on. Preaching, shouting, danc -
ing, singing, absorbing, arguing, counseling, pleading, commanding. 
Their passion burned or smoldered like lava over a land that had 
waged war against them and their ﬂock without surcease. A lily-livered 
war without honor as either its point or reward; an unprincipled war 
that thrived as much on the victor’s cowardice as on his mendacity. On 
stage and in print he and his brethren had been the heart of comedy, 
the chosen backs for parody’s knife. They were cursed by death row 
inmates, derided by pimps. Begrudged even miserly collection plates. 
Yet through all of that, if the Spirit seemed to be slipping away they had 
held on to it with their teeth if they had to, grabbed it in their ﬁsts if 
need be. They took it to buildings ready to be condemned, to churches 
from which white congregations had ﬂed, to quilt tents, to ravines 
and logs in clearings. Whispered it in cabins lit by moonlight lest the 
Law see. Prayed for it behind trees and in sod houses, their voices 
undaunted by roaring winds. From Abyssinian to storefronts, from 
Pilgrim Baptist to abandoned movie houses; in polished shoes, worn 
boots, beat-up cars and Lincoln Continentals, well fed or malnour -
ished, they let their light, ﬂickering low or blazing like a comet, pierce 
the darkness of days. They wiped white folks’ spit from the faces of 
159 P ARADISE  
black children, hid strangers from posses and police, relayed life-
preserving information faster than the newspaper and better than the 
radio. At sickbeds they looked death in the eye and mouth. They 
pressed the heads of weeping mothers to their shoulders before con -
ducting their life-gouged daughters to the cemetery. They wept for 
chain gangs, reasoned with magistrates. Made whole congregations 
scream. In ecstasy. In belief. That death was life, don’t you know, and 
every life, don’t you know, was holy, don’t you know, in His eyesight. 
Rocked as they were by the sight of evil, its snout was familiar to them. 
Real wonder, however, lay in the amazing shapes and substances 
God’s grace took: gospel in times of persecution; the exquisite wins of 
people forbidden to compete; the upright righteousness of those who 
let no boot hold them down—people who made Job’s patience look 
like restlessness. Elegance when all around was shabby. 
Richard Misner knew all that. Yet, however intact his knowledge 
and respect, the tremor inside him now was ungovernable. Pulliam 
had ﬁngered a membrane enclosing a ravenous appetite for ven -
geance, an appetite he needed to understand in order to subdue. Had 
the times ﬁnally gotten to him? Was the desolation that rose after 
King’s murder, a desolation that climbed like a tidal wave in slow 
motion, just now washing over him? Or was it the calamity of watching 
the drawn-out abasement of a noxious President? Had the long, unin -
telligible war infected him? Behaving like a dormant virus in blossom 
now that it was coming to a raggedy close? Everybody on his high 
school football team died in that war. Eleven broad-backed boys. They 
were the ones he had looked up to, wanted to be like. Was he just now 
gagging at their futile death? Was that the origin of this incipient 
hunger for violence? 
Or was it Ruby? 
What was it about this town, these people, that enraged him? They 
were different from other communities in only a couple of ways: 
beauty and isolation. All of them were handsome, some exceptionally 
so. Except for three or four, they were coal black, athletic, with non -
committal eyes. All of them maintained an icy suspicion of outsiders. 
Otherwise they were like all small black communities: protective, 
God-loving, thrifty but not miserly. They saved and spent; liked money 
160 Divine  
in the bank and nice things too. When he arrived he thought their 
ﬂaws were normal; their disagreements ordinary. They were pleased by 
the accomplishments of their neighbors and their mockery of the lazy 
and the loose was full of laughter. Or used to be. Now, it seemed, the 
glacial wariness they once conﬁned to strangers more and more was 
directed toward each other. Had he contributed to it? He could not 
help admitting that without his presence there would probably be no 
contention, no painted ﬁsts, no quarrels about missing language on an 
oven’s lip. No warnings about meetings he held with a dozen or so 
young people. Certainly no public, let alone physical, antagonism 
between businessmen. And absolutely no runaways. No drinking. 
Even acknowledging his part in the town’s unraveling, Misner was 
dissatisﬁed. Why such stubbornness, such venom against asserting 
rights, claiming a wider role in the affairs of black people? They, of all 
people, knew the necessity of unalloyed will; the rewards of courage 
and single-mindedness. Of all people, they understood the mecha -
nisms of wresting power. Didn’t they? 
Over and over and with the least provocation, they pulled from 
their stock of stories tales about the old folks, their grands and great-
grands; their fathers and mothers. Dangerous confrontations, clever 
maneuvers. Testimonies to endurance, wit, skill and strength. Tales of 
luck and outrage. But why were there no stories to tell of themselves? 
About their own lives they shut up. Had nothing to say, pass on. As 
though past heroism was enough of a future to live by. As though, 
rather than children, they wanted duplicates. 
Misner was hoping for answers down there on his knees. Not a 
growing catalogue of questions. So he did what he was accustomed to 
doing: asked Him to come along as he struck out, late and agitated, for 
the wedding reception. Being in His company quieted anger. As he left 
the parsonage and turned into Central Avenue, he could hear the light 
breathing of his companion, but no word of advice or consolation. He 
was passing Harper’s drugstore when he saw a crowd gathered near the 
Oven. From it, in a burst of tuneup-needy engine roar, shot a Cadillac. 
In less than a minute it passed him, and he recognized two Convent 
women among the passengers. By the time he got to the Morgans’ 
yard, the crowd had dispersed. The sugar-drunk children were racing 
161 P ARADISE  
and tumbling with Steward’s collies. The Oven was deserted. The 
instant he stepped inside Soane and Deek’s house, he could see that 
all was aglow. Menus came forward to embrace him. Pulliam, Arnold 
and Deek interrupted their deep conversation to shake his hand. The 
Carys were singing a duet, a chorus backing them. So he was not 
startled to see Jeff Fleetwood laughing pleasantly with the very man 
he had drawn a gun on some weeks ago—the freshly married groom. 
Only the bride looked askew. 
The silence in the Cadillac was not an embarrassed one. None of the 
passengers had high expectations of men in suits, so they were not sur -
prised to be asked to leave the premises. “Give these little girls their 
bicycles back,” said one. “Get on out of here,” said another, through a 
mouthful of tobacco. The younger men who had laughed and cheered 
them on were ordered away without words. Just a look and a head 
movement from a man seven feet tall. Nor were they angry about the 
dismissal—slightly put out, maybe, but not seriously. One, the driver, 
had never seen a man who didn’t look like an unlit explosion. Another, 
in the front passenger seat, considered the boring sexual images she 
had probably incited and recommitted herself to making tracks to 
somewhere else. A third, who had really been having fun, sat in the 
back seat thinking that although she knew what anger looked like, she 
had no idea what it might feel like. She always did what she was told, 
so when the man said, “Give these little girl s..., ” she did it with a 
smile. The fourth passenger was grateful for the expulsion. This was 
her second day at the Convent and the third day of having said not one 
word to anybody. Except today when the girl, Billie something, came 
to stand near her. 
“You all right?” She wore a shell-pink gown and instead of the 
shower cap had tiny yellow roses pinned into her hair. “Pallas? You 
okay?” 
She nodded and tried not to shiver. 
“You’re safe out there, but I’ll come by to see if you need anything, 
all right?” 
“Yes,” Pallas whispered. Then, “Thanks.” 
162 Divine  
So there. She had opened her lips a tiny bit to say two words, and 
no black water had seeped in. The cold still shook her bones, but the 
dark water had receded. For now. At night, of course, it would return 
and she would be back in it—trying not to think about what swam 
below her neck. It was the top of the water she concentrated on and 
the ﬂashlight licking the edge, then darting farther out over the black 
glimmer. Hoping, hoping the things touching below were sweet little 
goldﬁsh like the ones in the bowl her father bought her when she was 
ﬁve. Or guppies, angels. Not alligators or snakes. This was a lake not a 
swamp or the aquarium at the San Diego zoo. Floating over the water, 
the whispers were closer than their calls. “Here, pussy. Here, pussy. 
Kitty, kitty, kitty,” sounded far away; but “Gimme the ﬂash, dickface, 
izzat her, let go, maybe she drowned, no way,” slid into the skin behind 
her ears. 
Pallas stared out of the window at a sky so steady, landscape so fea -
tureless she had no sense of being in a moving car. The smell of Gigi’s 
bubble gum mixed with her cigarette smoke was nauseating. 
“Here, pussy. Here.” Pallas had heard that before. A lifetime ago 
on the happiest day of her life. On the escalator. Last Christmas. Spo -
ken by the crazy woman, whom she could see now in greater detail 
than when ﬁrst sighted. 
The hair at the top of her head, sectioned off with a red plastic bar -
rette, would have been a small pompadour or a curl had it been longer 
than two or three inches. In the event, it was neither. Just a tuft held 
rigid by a child’s barrette. Two other hair clips, one yellow, one neon 
purple, held ﬁngerfuls of hair at her temples. Her dark velvet face was 
on display and rendered completely unseen by the biscuit-size disks of 
scarlet rouge, the fuchsia lipstick drawn crookedly beyond the rim of 
her lips, the black eyebrow pencil that trailed down toward her cheek -
bones. Everything else about her was dazzle and clunk: white plastic 
earrings, copper bracelets, pastel beads at her throat, and much, much 
more where all that came from in the bags she carried: two BOAC car -
rier bags and a woven metal purse shaped like a cigar box. She wore a 
white cotton halter and a little-bitty red skirt. The hose on her short 
legs, a cinnamon color thought agreeable to black women’s legs, were 
as much a study in running as her high heels were in run over. Inner 
163 P ARADISE  
arm skin and a small, sturdy paunch suggested she was about forty 
years old, but she could have been ﬁfty or twenty. The dance she 
danced on the up escalator, the rolling hips, the sway of her head, 
called to mind a bygone era of slow grind in a badly lit room of cou -
ples. Not the electric go-go pace of 1974. The teeth could have been 
done anywhere: Kingston, Jamaica, or Pass Christian, Mississippi; 
Addis Ababa or Warsaw. Stunning gold, they dated her smile while 
giving it the seriousness the rest of her clothing withheld. 
Most eyes looked away from her—down at the ﬂoating metal steps 
underfoot or out at the Christmas decorations enlivening the depart -
ment store. Children, however, and Pallas Truelove stared. 
California Christmases are always a treat and this one promised 
to be a marvel. Brilliant skies and heat turned up the gloss of artiﬁ -
cial snow, plumped the green-and-gold, pink-and-silver wreaths. Pal -
las, laden with packages, just managed to avoid tripping off the down 
escalator. She didn’t understand why the woman with the rouge and 
gold teeth fascinated her. They had nothing in common. The earrings 
that hung from Pallas’ lobes were eighteen carat; the boots on her feet 
were handmade, her jeans custom-made, and the buckle on her 
leather belt was handsomely worked silver. 
Pallas had stumbled off the escalator in a light panic, rushing to 
the doors, outside which Carlos was waiting for her. The revolting 
woman’s singsong merged with the carols piping throughout the store: 
“Here’s pussy. Want some pussy, pussy.” 
“Ma-a-a-vis!” 
Mavis wouldn’t look at her. Gigi always uglied up her name, 
pulling it out like a string of her sticky bubble gum. 
“Can’t you go over ten miles an hour? Cha-rist!” 
“Car needs a new fan belt. And I’m not going to take it over forty,” 
said Mavis. 
“Ten. Forty. It’s like walking.” Gigi sighed. 
“Maybe I’ll just pull over here and let you see what walking’s like. 
Want me to?” 
“Don’t fuck with me. Drag me out to that bumme r . . . Did you  
164 Divine  
see that guy, Sen? Menus. The one who shit himself when he stayed 
with us?” 
Seneca nodded. “He didn’t say anything mean, though.” 
“He didn’t stop them either,” said Gigi. “All that puke, that shit I 
cleaned up.” 
“Connie said he could stay. And we all cleaned it,” said Mavis, 
“not just you. And nobody dragged you. You didn’t have to go.” 
“He had the d.t.’s, for crying out loud.” 
“Close your window, please, Mavis?” Seneca asked. 
“Too much wind back there?” 
“She’s shaking again. I think she’s cold.” 
“It’s ninety degrees! What the hell is the matter with her?” Gigi 
scanned the trembling girl. 
“Should I stop?” asked Mavis. “She might throw up again.” 
“No, don’t stop. I’ll hold her.” Seneca arranged Pallas in her arms, 
rubbing the goose-bumpy arms. “Maybe she’s carsick. I thought the 
party would cheer her up some. Looks like it made her worse.” 
“That stupid, fucked-up town make anybody puke. I can’t be -
lieve that’s what they call a party. Hymns, for crying out loud!” Gigi 
laughed. 
“It was a wedding party, not a disco.” Mavis wiped the perspiration 
forming under her neck. “Besides, you just wanted to see your love 
pony again.” 
“That asshole?” 
“Yeah. Him.” Mavis smiled. “Now he’s married, you want him 
back.” 
“If I want him back I can get him back. What I want is to leave this 
fucking place.” 
“You’ve been saying that for four years—right, Sen?” 
Gigi opened her mouth, then paused. Was it four? She thought 
two. But at least two were spent fooling around with K.D., the prick. 
Had she let him keep her that long promising to get enough money to 
take her away? Or was it some other promise that kept her there? Of 
trees entwined near cold water. “Yeah, well, now I’m for real,” she told 
Mavis, and hoped she really was. 
After a grunt of disbelief from Mavis, the car was silent again. Pal -
165 P ARADISE  
las let her head rest on Seneca’s breasts, wishing they were gone and 
that instead Carlos’ hard, smooth chest supported her cheek as it had 
whenever she wanted for seven hundred miles. Her sixteenth-birthday 
gift, a red Toyota with a built-in eight-track tape deck, was crammed 
with Christmas presents. Things anybody’s mother would like, but in a 
variety of colors and styles because she couldn’t take a chance on hav -
ing nothing that would please a woman she had not seen in thirteen 
years. Driving off with Carlos at the wheel just before Christmas was a 
holiday trip to see her mother. Not running away from her father; not 
eloping with the coolest, most gorgeous man in the world. 
Everything had been carefully planned: items were hidden, move -
ments camouﬂaged, lest Providence, the eagle-eyed housekeeper, or 
her brother, Jerome, see. Her father wasn’t around enough to notice 
anything. He was a lawyer with a small client list, but two were big-
time crossover black entertainers. As long as Milton Truelove kept 
them on top, he didn’t need to acquire more, although he kept a look -
out eye for other young performers who might hit the charts and stay 
there. 
With Carlos’ help it was as easy as it was exciting: the lies told to 
her girlfriends had to be cemented; the items left behind had to signal 
return, not escape (driver’s license—a duplicate—her teddy bears, 
watch, toiletries, jewelry, credit cards). This last made it necessary to 
do massive check cashing and shopping on the very day they drove 
away. She wanted to buy more, much more, for Carlos, but he insisted 
otherwise. He never took presents from her in all the time she knew 
him—four months. Wouldn’t even let her buy meals. He would close 
his beautiful eyes and shake his head as though her offer saddened 
him. Pallas had met him in the school parking lot the day her Toyota 
wouldn’t start. Actually met him that day but had seen him many 
times. He was the movie-star-looking maintenance man at her high 
school. All the girls went creamy over him. The day he pressed the 
accelerator to the ﬂoor, telling Pallas her gas line was ﬂooded, was 
the beginning. He offered to follow her home in his Ford to make sure 
she didn’t stall out again. She didn’t and he waved goodbye. Pallas 
brought him a present—an album—the next day and had trouble 
making him accept it. “Only if you let me buy you a chili dog,” he said. 
166 Divine  
Pallas’ mouth had gone felt with the thrill of it all. They saw each other 
every weekend after that. She did everything she could think of to get 
him to make love to her. He responded passionately to their necking 
but for weeks never allowed more. He was the one who said, “When 
we are married.” 
Carlos was not a janitor, really. He sculpted, and when Pallas told 
him about her painter mother and where she lived, he smiled and said 
it was a perfect place for an artist. The whole thing fell into place. Car -
los could leave his job with little outcry during the holidays. Milton 
Truelove would be extra busy with clients’ parties, showcase concerts 
and television deals. Pallas searched through years of birthday and 
Christmas cards from her mother for the most recent address, and the 
lovers were off without a hitch or a cloud. Except for the crazy black 
woman ruining the Christmas carols. 
Pallas snuggled Seneca’s breasts, which, although uncomfortable, 
diluted the chill racking her. The women in the front seat were quar -
reling again, in high-pitched voices that hurt her head. 
“Exhibitionist bitch! Soane is a friend of ours. What do I tell her 
now?” 
“She’s Connie’s friend. Nothing to do with you.” 
“I’m the one sell her the peppers, make up her tonic .... ” 
“Whazzat make you, a chemist? It’s just rosemary, a little bran 
mixed with aspirin.” 
“Whatever it is, it’s my responsibility.” 
“Only when Connie’s drunk.” 
“Keep your nasty mouth off her. She never drank till you came.” 
“That’s what you say. She even sleeps in the wine cellar.” 
“Her bedroom is down there! You’re such a fool.” 
“She’s not a maid anymore. She could sleep upstairs if she wanted. 
She just wants to be close to that liquor is all.” 
“God, I hate your guts.” 
Seneca intervened in a soft voice designed for harmony. “Connie’s 
not drunk. She’s unhappy. She should have come with us, though. It 
would have been different.” 
“It was ﬁne. Just ﬁne!” said Gigi. “Till those fucking preacher 
types came over.” She lit a fresh cigarette from a dying one. 
167 P ARADISE  
“Can’t you stop smoking for two minutes?” Mavis asked. 
“No!” 
“Don’t see what that nigger ever saw in you,” Mavis continued. 
“Or maybe I do, since you can’t seem to keep it covered.” 
“Jealous?” 
“Like hell.” 
“Like hell, like hell. Nobody’s fucked you in ten years, you dried-
up husk.” 
“Get out!” Mavis screamed, braking the car. “Get the hell out of 
my car!” 
“You gonna make me? Touch me, I’ll tear your face off. You fuck -
ing felon!” and she rammed her cigarette into Mavis’ arm. 
They couldn’t ﬁght really well in the space available, but they 
tried. Seneca held Pallas in her arms and watched. Once upon a time 
she would try to separate them, but now she knew better. When they 
were exhausted they’d stop, and peace would reign longer than if 
she interfered. Gigi knew Mavis’ touchy parts: anything insulting 
to Connie and any reference to her fugitive state. On her last trip 
Mavis learned from her mother of the warrant posted for her arrest for 
grand larceny, abandonment and suspicion of murdering two of her 
children. 
The Cadillac rocked. Gigi was scrappy but vain—she didn’t want 
bruises or scratches to mar her lovely face and she worried constantly 
about her hair. Mavis was slow but a steady, joyful hitter. When Gigi 
saw blood she assumed it was her own and scrambled from the car, 
Mavis scooting after her. Under a metal-hot sky void of even one arrow 
of birds they fought on the road and its shoulder. 
Pallas sat up, mesmerized by the bodies roiling dust and crushing 
weeds. Intent bodies unaware of any watcher under a blank sky in 
Oklahoma or a painted one in Mehita, New Mexico. Months after 
Dee Dee Truelove’s excited hugs and kisses: months of marveling 
at the spectacular scenery outside her mother’s windows; months 
of eating wonderful food; months of artist talk among Dee Dee’s 
friends—all kinds of artists: Indians, New Yorkers, old people, hippies, 
Mexicans, blacks—and months of talk among the three of them at 
168 Divine  
night under stars Pallas thought only Disney made. After all those 
months, Carlos said, “This is where I belong,” sighing deeply. “This 
is the home I’ve been looking for.” His face, moon-drenched, made 
Pallas’ heart stand. Her mother yawned. “Of course it is,” said Dee Dee 
Truelove. Carlos yawned too, and right then she should have seen it— 
the simultaneous yawns, the settling-in voices. She should have calcu -
lated the arithmetic—Carlos was closer in age to Dee Dee than to her. 
Had she noticed, perhaps she could have prevented the grappling bod -
ies exchanging moans in the grass, unmindful of any watcher. Then 
there would have been no stupeﬁed run to the Toyota, no blind drive 
on roads without destinations, no bumping, sideswiping trucks. No 
water with soft things touching beneath. 
Feeling again the repulsive tickle and stroke of tentacles, of invisi -
ble scales, Pallas turned away from the ﬁghting-women scene and 
lifted her arm to circle Seneca’s neck and press her face deeper into 
that tiny bosom. 
Seneca alone saw the truck approach. The driver slowed, maybe to 
get around the Cadillac hogging the road, maybe to offer help, but he 
stayed long enough to see outlaw women rolling on the ground, 
dresses torn, secret ﬂesh on display. And see also two other women 
embracing in the back seat. For long moments his eyes were wide. 
Then he shook his head and gunned the motor of his truck. 
Finally Gigi and Mavis lay gasping. One, then the other, sat up to 
touch herself, to inventory her wounds. Gigi searched for the shoe she 
had lost; Mavis for the elastic that had held her hair. Wordlessly they 
returned to the car. Mavis drove with one hand. Gigi stuck a cigarette 
in the good side of her mouth. 
In 1922 the white laborers had laughed among themselves—a big 
stone house in the middle of nothing. The Indians had not. In mean 
weather, with ﬁrewood a sacrilege in tree-scarce country, coal expen -
sive, cow chips foul, the mansion seemed to them a demented notion. 
The embezzler had ordered tons of coal—none of which he got to use. 
The nuns who took the property over had endurance, kerosene and 
layers of exquisitely made habits. But in spring, summer and during 
some warm autumns, the stone walls of the house were a cool blessing. 
169 P ARADISE  
Gigi raced up the stairs beating Mavis to available bathwater. 
While the plumbing coughed she stripped and looked at herself in the 
one unpainted mirror. Other than a knee and both elbows, the damage 
wasn’t too bad. Nails broken, of course, but no puffed eye or broken 
nose. More bruises might show up tomorrow, though. It was the lip 
swelling around its split that troubled her. With pressure it oozed a 
trickle of blood and suddenly everybody was running through the 
streets of Oakland, California. Sirens—police? ambulance? ﬁre 
trucks?—shook the eardrums. A wall of advancing police cut off 
passage east and west. The runners threw what they had brought or 
could ﬁnd and ﬂed. She and Mikey were holding hands at ﬁrst, run -
ning down a side street behind a splinter crowd. A street of small 
houses, lawns. There were no shots—no gunﬁre at all. Just the musical 
screams of girls and the steady roar of men in ﬁght-face. Sirens, yes, 
and distant bullhorns, but no breaking glass, no body slams, no gun -
ﬁre. So why did a map of red grow on the little boy’s white shirt? She 
wasn’t seeing clearly. The crowd thickened and then stopped, pre -
vented by something ahead. Mikey was several shoulders beyond her, 
pushing through. Gigi looked again at the boy on the fresh green lawn. 
He was so well dressed: bow tie, white shirt, glossy laced-up shoes. But 
the shirt was dirty now, covered with red peonies. He jerked, and blood 
ﬂowed from his mouth. He held his hands out, carefully, to catch it 
lest it ruin his shoes the way it had already ruined his shirt. 
Over a hundred injured, the newspaper said, but no mention of 
gunﬁre or a shot kid. No mention of a neat little colored boy carrying 
his blood in his hands. 
The water trickled into the tub. Gigi put rollers in her hair. Then 
she got down on her stomach to examine again the progress she had 
made with the box hidden under the tub. The tile above it was 
completely dislodged, but the metal box seemed to be cemented in 
place. Reaching under the tub was the problem. If she’d told K.D., he 
would have helped her, but then she would have had to share the 
contents: gold, maybe, diamonds, great packets of cash. Whatever it 
was, it was hers—and Connie’s if she wanted some. But no one else’s. 
Never Mavis. Seneca wouldn’t want any, and this latest girl, with the 
170 Divine  
splintered-glass eyes and a head thick with curly hair—who knew who 
or what she was? Gigi stood up, brushed away dust and soil from her 
skin then stepped into the tub. She sat there going over her options. 
Connie, she thought. Connie. 
Then, lying back so the bubbles reached her chin, she thought of 
Seneca’s nose, the way her nostrils moved when she slept. Of the tilt 
of her lips whether smiling or not; her thick, perfectly winged eye -
brows. And her voice—soft, mildly hungry. Like a kiss. 
In the bathroom at the other end of the hall, an elated Mavis 
cleaned up at the sink. Then she changed clothes before going down 
to the kitchen to make supper. Leftover chicken, chopped with pep -
pers and onions, tarragon, a sauce of some kind, cheese, maybe, and 
wrapped in that pancake thing Connie had taught her to make. That 
would please her. She would take a plate of it down to Connie and tell 
her what had happened. Not the ﬁght. That wasn’t important. In fact 
she had enjoyed it. Pounding, pounding, even biting Gigi was exhila -
rating, just as cooking was. It was more proof that the old Mavis was 
dead. The one who couldn’t defend herself from an eleven-year-old 
girl, let alone her husband. The one who couldn’t ﬁgure out or man -
age a simple meal, who relied on delis and drive-throughs, now cre -
ated crepe-like delicacies without shopping every day. 
But she was stung by Gigi’s reference to her sexlessness—which 
was funny in a way. When she and Frank married she did like it. Sort 
of. Then it became required torture, longer but not much different 
from being slapped out of her chair. These years at the Convent were 
free of all that. Still, when the thing came at night she didn’t ﬁght it 
anymore. Once upon a time it had been an occasional nightmare—a 
lion cub that gnawed her throat. Recently it had taken another form— 
human—and lay on top or approached from the rear. “Incubus,” Con -
nie had said. “Fight it,” she said. But Mavis couldn’t or wouldn’t. Now 
she needed to know if what Gigi said about her was the reason she wel -
comed it. She still heard Merle and Pearl, felt their ﬂutter in every 
room of the Convent. Perhaps she ought to admit, confess, to Connie 
that adding the night visits to laughing children and a “mother” who 
loved her shaped up like a happy family. Better: when she took Connie 
171 P ARADISE  
her supper, she would tell her about the reception, how Gigi had 
embarrassed everybody, especially Soane, then ask her what to do 
about the night visits. Connie would know. Connie. 
Norma Fox’s cashmere serape came in handy once more. Seneca 
wrapped it around Pallas and asked if she wanted anything. Water? 
Something to eat? Pallas signaled no. She can’t cry yet, thought Sen -
eca. The pain was down too far. When it came up, tears would follow, 
and Seneca wanted Connie to be there when it happened. So she 
warmed the girl up as best she could, tried to smooth the heavy hair 
and, carrying a candle, led her down to Connie. 
Part of the cellar, a huge cold room with a domed ceiling, was 
lined with racks of bottles. Wine as old as Connie. The nuns seldom 
touched it, Connie told her, only when they could get a priest out 
there to say the mass they were starved for. And on some Christmases 
they made a moist cake soaked in a 1915 Veuve Clicquot instead of 
rum. All around in shadow lurked the shapes of trunks, wooden boxes, 
furniture, disused and broken. Nude women in polished marble; men 
in rough stone. At the farthest end was the door to Connie’s room. 
Although it was not built for a maid, as Mavis said, its original purpose 
was unclear. Connie used it, liked it, for its darkness. Sunlight was not 
a menace to her there. 
Seneca knocked, got no answer and pushed open the door. Con -
nie was sitting in a wicker rocking chair snoring lightly. When Seneca 
entered she woke instantly. 
“Who’s carrying that light?” 
“It’s me—Seneca. And a friend.” 
“Set it down over there.” She motioned to a chest of drawers 
behind her. 
“This is Pallas. She came a couple days ago. She said she wants 
to meet you.” 
“Did she?” asked Connie. 
Candle ﬂame made it difﬁcult to see, but Seneca recognized the 
Virgin Mary, the pair of shiny nun shoes, the rosary and, on the 
dresser, something taking root in a jar of water. 
172 Divine  
“Who hurt you, little one?” asked Connie. 
Seneca sat down on the ﬂoor. She had scant hope that Pallas 
would say much if anything at all. But Connie was magic. She just 
stretched out her hand and Pallas went to her, sat on her lap, talk-
crying at ﬁrst, then just crying, while Connie said, “Drink a little of 
this,” and “What pretty earrings,” and “Poor little one, poor, poor little 
one. They hurt my poor little one.” 
It was wine-soaked and took an hour; it was backward and punc -
tured and incomplete, but it came out—little one’s story of who had 
hurt her. 
She lost her shoes, she said, so at ﬁrst nobody would stop for her. 
Then, she said, the Indian woman in a fedora. Or rather a truckful of 
Indians stopped for her at dawn as she limped barefoot in shorts by the 
side of the road. A man drove. Next to him the woman, with a child on 
her lap. Pallas couldn’t tell if it was a boy child or a girl. Six young men 
sat in the back. It was the woman who made it possible to accept the 
offer of a lift. Under the brim of her hat the sleet-gray eyes were expres -
sionless but her presence among the men civilized them—as did the 
child in her lap. 
“Where you headed?” she asked. 
That was when Pallas discovered that her vocal cords didn’t work. 
That for soundmaking power she couldn’t rival the solitary windmill 
creaking in the ﬁeld behind her. So she pointed in the direction the 
truck was going. 
“Get in back, then,” said the woman. 
Pallas climbed among the males—her age mostly—and sat as far 
away from them as she could, praying that the woman was their 
mother sister aunt—or any restraining inﬂuence. 
The Indian boys stared at her but said nothing at all. Arms on 
knees, they looked without a smile at her pink shorts, Day-Glo T-shirt. 
After a while, they opened paper bags and began to eat. They offered 
her a thick baloney sandwich and one of the onions they ate like 
apples. Afraid a refusal would insult them, Pallas accepted, then found 
herself eating all of it like a dog, gulping, surprised by her hunger. The 
truck’s sway and rock put her to sleep for a few minutes off and on; 
each time it happened she woke ﬁghting out of a dream of black water 
173 P ARADISE  
seeping into her mouth, her nose. They passed places with scattered 
houses, Agways, a gas station, but did not stop until they reached a siz -
able town. By then it was late afternoon. The truck moved down an 
empty street, slowing in front of a Baptist church that had “Primitive” 
in its sign. 
“You wait there,” the woman said. “Somebody’ll come and take 
care of you.” 
The boys helped her climb down, and the truck drove off. 
Pallas waited on the church steps. There were no houses that she 
could see and no one was in the street. As the sun dipped, the air 
turned chilly. Only the soles of her feet, raw and burning, distracted 
her from the cold overtaking her marrow. Finally she heard an engine 
and looked up to see the Indian woman again—but alone this time— 
driving the same truck. 
“Get in,” she said, and drove Pallas several blocks to a low building 
with a corrugated roof. “Go in there,” she said. “It’s a clinic. I don’t 
know if you was bothered or what. You look like it to me. Like a both -
ered girl. But don’t tell them in there. I don’t know if it’s true, but don’t 
mention it, you hear? Better not to. Just say you was beat up or throwed 
out or something.” 
She smiled then, though her eyes were very grave. “Your hair’s full 
of algae.” She took off her hat and placed it on Pallas’ head. “Go on,” 
she said. 
Pallas sat in the reception room along with patients as silent as 
she. Two elderly women with head scarves, a feverish baby in the arms 
of its sleeping mother. The receptionist looked at her with unwhole -
some curiosity but didn’t say anything. It was threatening to get dark 
when two men came in, one with a partially severed hand. Pallas and 
the sleeping mother were yet to be attended to, but the man seeping 
blood into a towel took precedence. As the receptionist led him away, 
Pallas ran out of the entrance and around to the side of the building, 
where she lost every bit of the onion and baloney. Retching violently, 
she heard, before she saw, two women approach. Both wore shower 
caps and blue uniforms. 
“Look at that,” one said. 
174 Divine  
They came toward Pallas and stood, heads cocked, watching her 
heave. 
“You on your way in or out?” 
“Must be pregnant.” 
“You trying to see the nurse, honey?” 
“She better hurry up.” 
“Let’s take her to Rita.” 
“You take her, Billie. I got to go.” 
“She got a hat on but no shoes. Okay, go ’head. See you to -
morrow.” 
Pallas straightened up, clutching her stomach, breathing hard 
through her mouth. 
“Listen to me. Clinic’s closing less you an emergency. You sure 
you ain’t pregnant?” 
Pallas, trying to control another retch, shuddered. 
Billie turned to watch her friend’s car leave the lot then looked 
down at the vomit. Without making a face she kicked dirt until it was 
out of sight. 
“Where your pocketbook?” she asked, moving Pallas away from 
the buried sick. “Where you live? What they call you?” 
Pallas touched her throat and made a sound like a key trying to 
turn in the wrong lock. All she could do was shake her head. Then, 
like a child alone in a deserted playground, she drew her name in 
the dirt with her toe. Then slowly, imitating the girl’s earlier erasure 
with the vomit, she kicked her name away, covering it completely with 
red dirt. 
Billie took off her shower cap. She was much taller than Pallas and 
had to bend to see into the downcast eyes. 
“You come with me, girl,” said Billie. “You a pitiful case if ever I 
see one. And I’ve seen some.” 
She drove through blue evening air speaking quietly, reassuringly. 
“This is a place where you can stay for a while. No questions. I did it 
once and they were nice to me. Nicer than—well, very nice. Don’t be 
afraid. I used to be. Afraid of them, I mean. Don’t see many girls like 
them out here.” She laughed then. “A little nuts, maybe, but loose, 
175 P ARADISE  
relaxed, kind of. Don’t be surprised if they don’t have on any clothes. I 
was, at ﬁrst, but then it was, I don’t know, nothing. My mother would 
have knocked me into next week if I walked around like that. Anyway 
you can collect yourself there, think things through, with nothing or 
nobody bothering you all the time. They’ll take care of you or leave 
you alone—whichever way you want it.” 
The blue darkened around them except for a trim of silver in the 
distance. The ﬁelds rippled in a warm wind but Pallas was shivering by 
the time they reached the Convent. 
After handing her over to Mavis, the girl said, “I’ll come back to 
check on you, okay? Name’s Billie Cato.” 
The candle had burned down to an inch but its ﬂame was high. Pallas 
wiped her mouth with the back of her hand. The rocking chair rocked. 
Connie’s breathing was so deep Pallas thought she was sleeping. She 
could see Seneca, hand on chin, elbow on knee, looking up at her, but 
candle ﬂame, like moonlight in Mehita, distorted faces. 
Connie stirred. 
“I asked who hurt you. You telling me who helped you. Want to 
keep that other part secret for a little longer?” 
Pallas said nothing. 
“How old are you?” 
Eighteen, she started to answer, but then chose the truth. “Six -
teen,” she said. “I would have been a senior next year.” 
She would have cried again for her lost junior year, but Connie 
nudged her roughly. “Get up. You breaking my lap.” Then, in a softer 
voice, “Go on and get some sleep now. Stay as long as you like and tell 
me the rest when you want to.” 
Pallas stood and wobbled a bit from the rocking and the wine. 
“Thanks. But. I better call my father. I guess.” 
“We’ll take you,” said Seneca. “I know where there’s a telephone. 
But you have to stop crying, hear?” 
They left then, stepping carefully through the darkness, eyes 
trained on the low light the candle ﬂame shed. Pallas, bred in the 
overlight of Los Angeles, in houses without basements, associated 
176 Divine  
them with movie evil or trash or crawly things. She gripped Seneca’s 
hand and breathed through her mouth. But the gestures were expres -
sions of anticipated, not genuine, alarm. In fact, as they climbed the 
stairs, images of a grandmother rocking peacefully, of arms, a lap, a 
singing voice soothed her. The whole house felt permeated with a 
blessed malelessness, like a protected domain, free of hunters but 
exciting too. As though she might meet herself here—an unbridled, 
authentic self, but which she thought of as a “cool” self—in one of 
this house’s many rooms. 
A platter of tortilla-looking things sat on the table. Gigi, spruced 
up and quiet, with only a lopsided lip to mar her makeup, was fooling 
with her wide-band radio, trying to ﬁnd the one station that played 
what she wanted to hear—not the agricultural news; country music or 
Bible stuff. Mavis, muttering cooking instructions to herself, was at 
the stove. 
“Connie okay?” Mavis asked when she saw them enter.  
“Sure. She was good for Pallas. Right, Pallas?”  
“Yes. She’s nice. I feel better now.”  
“Wow. It talks,” said Gigi.  
Pallas smiled.  
“But is it going to puke some more? That’s the question.”  
“Gigi. Shut the hell up.” Mavis looked eagerly at Pallas. “You like  
crepes?” 
“Um. Starved,” Pallas answered. 
“There’s plenty. I put Connie’s aside, and I can make even more 
if you want.” 
“It needs some clothes.” Gigi was scanning Pallas closely. “Noth -
ing I got will ﬁt.” 
“Stop calling her ‘it.’ ” 
“All it’s got worth having is a hat. Where’d you put it?” 
“I’ve got jeans she can have,” said Seneca. 
Gigi snorted. “Make sure you wash them ﬁrst.” 
“Sure.” 
“Sure? Why you say ‘sure’? I haven’t seen you wash one thing 
since you came here, including yourself.” 
“Cut it out, Gigi!” Mavis spoke from behind closed teeth. 
177 P ARADISE  
“Well, I haven’t!” Gigi leaned over the table toward Seneca. “We 
don’t have much, but soap we do have.” 
“I said I’d wash them, didn’t I?” Seneca wiped perspiration from 
under her chin. 
“Why don’t you roll up your sleeves? You look like a junkie,” said 
Gigi. 
“Look who’s talking.” Mavis chuckled. 
“I’m talking junk, girl. Not a little boo.” 
Seneca looked at Gigi. “I don’t put chemicals in my body.” 
“But you used to, didn’t you?” 
“No, I didn’t used to.” 
“Let me see your arms, then.” 
“Get off!” 
“Gigi!” Mavis shouted. Seneca looked hurt. 
“Okay, okay,” said Gigi. 
“Why are you like that?” asked Seneca. 
“I’m sorry. Okay?” It was a rare admission, but apparently sincere. 
“I never took drugs. Never!” 
“Said I was sorry. Christ, Seneca.” 
“She’s a needler, Sen. Always sticking it in.” Mavis cleaned her 
plate. “Don’t let her get under your skin. That’s where the blood is.” 
“Shut the fuck up!” 
Mavis laughed. “There she goes again. So much for ‘sorry.’ ” 
“I apologized to Seneca, not you.” 
“Let’s just drop it.” Seneca sighed. “Is it okay to open the bottle, 
Mavis?” 
“Not just okay; it’s an order. We got to celebrate Pallas, don’t we?” 
“And her voice.” Seneca smiled. 
“And her appetite. Look at her.” 
Carlos had killed Pallas’ appetite. While he loved her (or seemed 
to), food, other than that ﬁrst chili dog, was a nuisance to her, an 
excuse to drink Cokes or a reason to go out. The pounds she had strug -
gled with since elementary school melted away. Carlos had never 
commented on her weight, but the fact that from the ﬁrst, when she 
was a butterball, he liked her anyway—chose her, made love to her— 
sealed her conﬁdence in him. His betrayal when she was at her 
178 Divine  
thinnest sharpened her shame. The nightmare event that forced her to 
hide in a lake had displaced for a while the betrayal, the hurt, that had 
driven her from her mother’s house. She had not been able even to 
whisper it in the darkness of a candlelit room. Her voice had returned, 
but the words to say her shame clung like polyps in her throat. 
The melted cheese covering the crepe-tortilla thing was tangy; the 
pieces of chicken had real ﬂavor, like meat; the pale, almost white but -
ter dripping from early corn was nothing like what she was accus -
tomed to; it had a creamy, sweetish taste. There was a warm sugary 
sauce poured over the bread pudding. And glass after glass of wine. 
The fear, the bickering, the nausea, the awful dirt ﬁght, the tears in the 
dark—all of the day’s unruly drama dissipated in the pleasure of chew -
ing food. When Mavis returned from taking Connie her supper, Gigi 
had found her station and was dancing the radio over to the open 
back door for better reception. She danced back to the table then and 
poured herself more wine. Eyes closed, hips grinding, she circled 
her arms to enclose the neck of a magic dancer. The other women 
watched her as they ﬁnished the meal. When last year’s top tune, 
“Killing Me Softly,” came on, it was not long before they all followed 
suit. Even Mavis. First apart, imagining partners. Then partnered, 
imagining each other. 
Wine-soothed, they slept deep as death that night. Gigi and 
Seneca in one bedroom. Mavis alone in another. So it was Pallas, 
asleep on the sofa in the ofﬁce/game room who heard the knocking. 
The girl was wearing white silk shoes and a cotton sundress. She 
carried a piece of wedding cake on a brand-new china plate. And her 
smile was regal. 
“I’m married now,” she said. “Where is he? Or was it a she?” 
Later that night, Mavis said, “We should have given her one of 
those dolls. Something.” 
“She’s crazy,” said Gigi. “I know everything about her. K.D. told 
me everything about her, and she’s the whole nuthouse. Boy, is his ass 
in trouble.” 
“Why’d she come here on her wedding night?” asked Pallas. 
“Long story.” Mavis dabbed alcohol on her arm, comparing the 
bloody scratches to the ones Gigi had put there earlier. “Came here 
179 P ARADISE  
years back. Connie delivered her baby for her. She didn’t want it, 
though.” 
“So where is it?” 
“With Merle and Pearl, I think.” 
“Who?” 
Gigi cut her eyes at Mavis. “It died.” 
“Doesn’t she know that?” asked Seneca. “She said you all killed it.” 
“I told you she’s the whole house of nuts.” 
“She left right after,” Mavis said. “I don’t know what she knows. 
She wouldn’t even look at it.” 
They paused then, seeing it: the turned-away face, hands covering 
ears so as not to hear that fresh but mournful cry. There would be no 
nipple, then. Nothing to put in the little mouth. No mother shoulder 
to snuggle against. None of them wanted to remember or know what 
had taken place afterward. 
“Maybe it wasn’t his. K.D.’s,” said Gigi. “Maybe she was cutting 
out on him.” 
“So? So what if it wasn’t his? It was hers.” Seneca sounded hurt. 
“I don’t understand.” Pallas moved toward the stove, where the 
leftover bread pudding sat. 
“I do. In a way.” Mavis sighed. “I’ll make us some coffee.” 
“Not for me. I’m going back to bed.” Gigi yawned. 
“She was really mad. You think she’ll get back all right?” 
“Saint Seneca. Please.” 
“She was screaming,” Seneca said, staring at Gigi. 
“So were we.” Mavis measured coffee into the percolator basket. 
“Yeah, but we didn’t call her names.” 
Gigi sucked her teeth. “How do you know what to call a psycho 
who’s got nothing better to do on her wedding night but hunt down 
a dead baby?” 
“Call her sorry?” 
“Sorry, my ass,” Gigi answered. “She just wants to hang on to that 
little dick she married.” 
“Didn’t you say you were going to bed?” 
“I am. Come on, Seneca.” 
Seneca ignored her roommate. “Should we tell Connie?” 
180 Divine  
“What for?” snapped Mavis. “Look. I don’t want that girl anywhere 
near Connie.” 
“I think she bit me.” Pallas appeared surprised. “Look. Is that teeth 
marks?” 
“What do you want, a rabies shot?” Gigi yawned. “Come on, Sen. 
Hey, Pallas. Lighten up.” 
Pallas stared. “I don’t want to sleep down here by myself.” 
“Who said you had to? That was your idea.” 
“Ther’re no more beds upstairs.” 
“Oh, Christ.” Gigi started toward the hall, Seneca following. 
“What a baby.” 
“I told you. The others are stored in the cellar. I’ll put one up 
tomorrow. You can sleep with me tonight,” said Mavis. “Don’t worry. 
She won’t be back.” She locked the back door then stood watching the 
coffee percolate. “By the way, what’s your name? Last name, I mean.” 
“Truelove.”  
“No kidding. And your mother named you Pallas?”  
“No. My father.”  
“What’s her name? Your mother.”  
“Dee Dee. Short for Divine.”  
“Oooo. I love it. Gigi! Gigi! You hear that? Her name’s Divine.  
Divine Truelove.” 
Gigi ran back to stick her head in the doorway. Seneca too. 
“It is not! That’s my mother’s name.” 
“She a stripper?” Gigi was grinning. 
“An artist.” 
“They all are, honey.” 
“Don’t tease her,” murmured Seneca. “She’s had a long day.” 
“Okay, okay, okay. Good nigh t . . . Divine.” G igi vanished back 
through the door. 
“Don’t pay her any attention,” Seneca said, then, whispering 
quickly as she left, “She has a small mind.” 
Mavis, still smiling, poured coffee and cut bread pudding. She 
served Pallas and sat down next to her, blowing into the coffee steam. 
Pallas picked at a third helping of dessert. 
“Show me the tooth marks,” said Mavis. 
181 P ARADISE  
Pallas turned her head and pulled at the neck of her T-shirt, ex -
posing her shoulder. 
“Oooo,” Mavis groaned. 
“Is every day like this here?” Pallas asked her. 
“Oh, no.” Mavis stroked the wounded skin. “This is the most 
peaceful place on earth.” 
“You’ll take me to call my father tomorrow?” 
“Yep. First thing.” Mavis stopped her stroking. “I love your hair.” 
They ﬁnished the nighttime snack in silence. Mavis picked up the 
lamp, and they abandoned the kitchen to darkness. When they were in 
front of Mavis’ bedroom door she didn’t open it. She froze. 
“Hear that? They’re happy,” she said, covering her laughing lips. “I 
knew it. They love that baby. Absolutely love it.” She turned to Pallas. 
“They like you too. They think you’re divine.” 
182 PAT RICIA  Bells and pine trees, cut from green and red construction paper, 
were piled neatly on the dining room table. All done. Just the glit -
ter was left for the trim. Last year she had made a mistake letting the 
smaller ones do it. After cleaning their ﬁngers and elbows of glue, after 
picking specks of silver from their hair and cheeks, she had to do most 
of the decorations over anyway. This time she would hand out the bells 
and trees while monitoring each dot of glue herself. In staging the 
school’s Christmas play the whole town helped or meddled: older men 
repaired the platform, assembled the crib; young ones fashioned new 
innkeepers and freshened the masks with paint. Women made doll 
babies, and children drew colored pictures of Christmas dinner food, 
mostly desserts—cakes, pies, candy canes, fruit—because roast turkeys 
were too much of a challenge for small ﬁngers. When the little ones 
had silvered the bells and pine trees, Patricia herself would thread 
loops at their tops. The Eastern star was Harper’s department. He 
checked it for repair each year making sure its points were sharp and 
that it would glow properly in the dark cloth sky. And she supposed old 
Nathan DuPres would deliver the opening remarks once again. A 
sweet man, but couldn’t stay the point to save him. The church pro -
grams were more formal—sermons, choirs, recitations by the children 
and prizes for the ones who managed to get through them without stut -
tering, crying or freezing up—but the school program, featuring the 
Nativity and involving the whole town, was older, having started 
before the churches were even built. 
Unlike recent years, the December days of 1974 were warm and 
185 P ARADISE  
windy. The sky was behaving like a showgirl: exchanging its pale, 
melancholy mornings for sporty ribbons of color in the evening. A 
mineral scent was in the air, sweeping down from some Genesis time 
when volcanoes stirred and lava cooled quickly under relentless wind. 
Wind that scoured cold stone, then sculpted it and, ﬁnally, crumbled 
it to the bits rock hounds loved. The same wind that once lifted 
streams of Cheyenne /Arapaho hair also parted clumps of it from the 
shoulders of bison, telling each when the other was near. 
She had noticed the mineral smell all day and now, ﬁnished with 
grading papers and making decorations, she checked the showgirl sky 
for a repeat performance. But it was over. Just some lilac shapes run -
ning after a Day-Glo sun. 
Her father had gone to bed early, exhausted from the monologue 
he had delivered at the supper table about the gas station he was plan -
ning. Eagle Oil was encouraging him—no use to talk to the big oil 
companies. Deek and Steward were interested in approving the loan, 
provided he could persuade somebody to sell him the property. So the 
question was where. Across from Anna’s store? Good spot, but Holy 
Redeemer might not think so. North, then? Next to Sargeant’s Feed 
and Seed? There would be plenty of customers—nobody would have 
to travel ninety miles for gasoline or keep tanks of it where they lived. 
The roads? Something might be done to the two dirt ones that ex -
tended south and north of Ruby’s paved road to meet the county route. 
If he secured the franchise, the county might tarmac them both. It 
would be a problem, though, trying to get local people to agree to peti -
tion for it—the old ones would put up a ﬁght. They liked being off the 
county road, accessible only to the lost and the knowledgeable. “But 
think on it, Patsy, just think on it. I could ﬁx cars, engines; sell tires, 
batteries, fan belts. Soda pop too. Something Anna don’t stock. No 
point in getting her riled up.” 
Patricia nodded. A very good idea, she thought, like all of his ideas. 
His veterinary practice (illegal—he had no license—but who knew or 
cared enough to drive a hundred miles to help Wisdom Poole yank on 
a foal stuck in its mother?); his butcher business (bring him the slaugh -
tered steer—he’d skin, butcher, carve and refrigerate it for you); and 
of course the ambulance/mortuary business. Because he had wanted 
186 Patricia  
to be, studied to be, a doctor, most of his enterprises had to do with 
operating on the sick or dead. The gas station idea was the ﬁrst nonsur -
gical proposal she could remember (though his eyes did ﬁre when he 
spoke of taking apart engines). She wished he had been a doctor, had 
been accepted in a medical school. Chances are her mother would be 
alive today. Maybe not. Maybe he would have been away at Meharry 
instead of the mortuary school when Delia died. 
Pat climbed the stairs to her bedroom and decided to while away 
the rest of the evening on her history project, or rather what used to be 
a history project but was nothing of the sort now. It began as a gift to 
the citizens of Ruby—a collection of family trees; the genealogies of 
each of the ﬁfteen families. Upside-down trees, the trunks sticking in 
the air, the branches sloping down. When the trees were completed, 
she had begun to supplement the branches of who begat whom with 
notes: what work they did, for example, where they lived, to what 
church they belonged. Some of the nicer touches (“Was Missy Rivers, 
wife of Thomas Blackhorse, born near the Mississippi River? Her 
name seems to sugges t . . .”)  she  had  gleaned from her students’ auto -
biographical compositions. Not anymore. Parents complained about 
their children being asked to gossip, to divulge what could be private 
information, secrets, even. After that, most of her notes came from talk -
ing to people, asking to see Bibles and examining church records. 
Things got out of hand when she asked to see letters and marriage cer -
tiﬁcates. The women narrowed their eyes before smiling and offering 
to freshen her coffee. Invisible doors closed, and the conversation 
turned to weather. But she didn’t want or need any further research. 
The trees still required occasional alterations—births, marriages, 
deaths—but her interest in the supplementary notes increased as 
the notes did, and she gave up all pretense to objective comment. The 
project became unﬁt for any eyes except her own. It had reached the 
point where the small m period was a joke, a dream, a violation of law 
that had her biting her thumbnail in frustration. Who were these 
women who, like her mother, had only one name? Celeste, Olive, Sor -
row, Ivlin, Pansy. Who were these women with generalized last names? 
Brown, Smith, Rivers, Stone, Jones. Women whose identity rested on 
the men they married—if marriage applied: a Morgan, a Flood, a 
187 P ARADISE  
Blackhorse, a Poole, a Fleetwood. Dovey had let her have the Morgan 
Bible for weeks, but it was the twenty minutes she spent looking at the 
Blackhorse Bible that convinced her that a new species of tree would 
be needed to go further, to record accurately the relationships among 
the ﬁfteen families of Ruby, their ancestors in Haven and, further back, 
in Mississippi and Louisiana. A voluntary act to ﬁll empty hours had 
become intensive labor streaked with the bad feelings that ride the skin 
like pollen when too much about one’s neighbors is known. The town’s 
ofﬁcial story, elaborated from pulpits, in Sunday school classes and 
ceremonial speeches, had a sturdy public life. Any footnotes, crevices 
or questions to be put took keen imagination and the persistence of a 
mind uncomfortable with oral histories. Pat had wanted proof in docu -
ments where possible to match the stories, and where proof was not 
available she interpreted—freely but, she thought, insightfully because 
she alone had the required emotional distance. She alone would ﬁgure 
out why a line was drawn through Ethan Blackhorse’s name in the 
Blackhorse Bible and what the heavy ink blot hid next to Zechariah’s 
name in the Morgan Bible. Her father told her some things, but he 
refused to talk about other things. Girlfriends like Kate and Anna were 
open, but older women—Dovey, Soane and Lone DuPres—hinted 
the most while saying the least. “Oh, I think those brothers had a 
disagreement of some kind.” That’s all Soane would say about the 
crossed-out name of her great-uncle. And not another word. 
There were nine large intact families who made the original jour -
ney, who were thrown out and cast away in Fairly, Oklahoma, and 
went on to found Haven. Their names were legend: Blackhorse, Mor -
gan, Poole, Fleetwood, Beauchamp, Cato, Flood and both DuPres 
families. With their siblings, wives and children, they were seventy-
nine or eighty-one in all (depending on whether the two stolen 
children were counted). Along with them came fragments of other 
families: a sister and a brother, four cousins, a river of aunts and great-
aunts shepherding the children of their dead sisters, brothers, nieces, 
nephews. Stories about these fragments, which made up some ﬁfty 
more, surfaced in the writing compositions of Pat’s students, the gossip 
and recollections at picnics, church dinners and woman talk over 
chores and hair preparation. Grandmothers sitting on the ﬂoor while a 
188 Patricia  
granddaughter scratched their scalps liked to reminisce aloud. Then 
bits of tales emerged like sparks lighting the absences that hovered 
over their childhoods and the shadows that dimmed their maturity. 
Anecdotes marked the spaces that had sat with them at the camp -
ﬁre. Jokes limned the mementos—a ring, a pocket watch—they had 
clamped in their ﬁsts while they slept and the descriptions of the 
clothes they had worn: too big shoes that belonged to a brother; the 
shawl of a great-aunt; the lace-trimmed bonnet of a younger sister. 
They talked about the orphans, males and females aged twelve to six -
teen, who spotted the travelers and asked to join, and the two toddlers 
they simply snatched up because the circumstances in which the chil -
dren were found wouldn’t let them do otherwise. Another eight. So 
about one hundred and ﬁfty-eight total completed the journey. 
When they got to the outskirts of Fairly, it was agreed that Drum 
Blackhorse, Rector Morgan and his brothers, Pryor and Shepherd, 
would announce themselves, while the others waited with Zechariah, 
who was too lame by then to stand unaided and straight in front of 
unknown men whose respect he would have demanded and whose 
pity would have broken him in two. His foot was shot through—by 
whom or why nobody knew or admitted, for the point of the story 
seemed to be that when the bullet entered he neither cried out nor 
limped away. It was that wound that forced him to stay behind and let 
his friend and his sons speak in his stead. It proved, however, to be a 
blessing because he missed witnessing the actual Disallowing; and 
missed hearing disbelievable words formed in the mouths of men to 
other men, men like them in all ways but one. Afterwards the people 
were no longer nine families and some more. They became a tight 
band of wayfarers bound by the enormity of what had happened to 
them. Their horror of whites was convulsive but abstract. They saved 
the clarity of their hatred for the men who had insulted them in ways 
too confounding for language: ﬁrst by excluding them, then by offer -
ing them staples to exist in that very exclusion. Everything anybody 
wanted to know about the citizens of Haven or Ruby lay in the ramiﬁ -
cations of that one rebuff out of many. But the ramiﬁcations of those 
ramiﬁcations were another story. 
Pat went to the window and raised it. Her mother’s grave lay at the 
189 P ARADISE  
edge of the yard. The wind soughed as though trying to dislodge 
sequins from the black crepe sky. Lilac bushes swished the side of the 
house. The mineral trace was overcome by the smell of supper food in 
the air. Pat closed the window, returned to her desk to prepare for 
another entry in her log. 
Arnette and K.D., married last April, were expecting a child next 
March. Or so said Lone DuPres, who ought to know. Lone was one of 
the stolen babies. Fairy DuPres had noticed her sitting quiet as a rock 
outside the door of a sod house. The sight of the silent child in a ﬁlthy 
shift could have remained just one more lonely picture they came 
across, except that the desolation about the place was unforgiving. 
Fairy was ﬁfteen then and bullheaded. She and Missy Rivers went to 
investigate. Inside was the dead mother and not a piece of bread in 
sight. Missy groaned before she spit. Fairy said, “God damn it. ’Scuse 
me, Lord,” and picked the baby up. When they told the others what 
they’d found, seven men reached for their shovels: Drum Blackhorse, 
his sons Thomas and Peter, Rector Morgan, Able Flood, Brood Poole, 
Sr., and Nathan DuPres’ father, Juvenal. While they dug, Fairy fed the 
baby water-soaked meal cake. Praise Compton tore her underskirt 
to wrap around it. Fulton Best fashioned a sturdy cross. Zechariah, 
ﬂanked by two of his boys, Shepherd and Pryor, and resting his ruined 
foot on its heel, delivered a burial prayer. His daughters Loving, Ella 
and Selanie gathered pink yarrow for the grave. There was a serious 
discussion about what to do with the child—where to place her— 
because the men seemed adamant about not adding a half-starved 
baby to their own quarter-starved ones. Fairy put up such a ﬁght she 
wore them down and then argued with Bitty Cato over the name. Fairy 
won that, too, and named the baby Lone because that’s how they 
found her. And Lone she still was for she never married, and when 
Fairy, who raised her and taught her everything she came to know 
about midwifery, died, Lone slipped right in and took over the birthing 
for everybody except now Arnette was insisting on going to the hospital 
in Demby to give birth. It cut Lone to the quick (she still believed 
that decent women had their babies at home and saloon women de -
livered in hospitals), but she knew the Fleetwoods hadn’t given up 
on thinking she was partly responsible for Sweetie and Jeff’s children, 
190 Patricia  
in spite of the fact that she had delivered thirty-two healthy babies 
to doing-just-ﬁne mothers since the last broken Fleetwood baby was 
delivered. So she said nothing except that Arnette’s time would be 
March of ’75. 
Pat located the Morgan ﬁle and went to the limb that, so far, con -
tained one line: 
Coffee Smith (aka K.D. [as in Kentucky Derby]) m. Arnette 
Fleetwood 
She wondered again who was that boy Ruby Morgan married? An 
army buddy of her brothers, it was said. But from where? His ﬁrst 
name, Coffee, was the same as Zechariah’s before he changed it to 
run for lieutenant governor; his last name was as generic as you could 
get. He was killed in Europe, so nobody got to know him well, not 
even his wife. You could tell from his photograph there wasn’t a brush 
of Private Smith in his son. K.D. was a mirror of Blackhorse and 
Morgan blood. 
There wasn’t much space beneath the K.D.–Arnette entry, but she 
thought they probably wouldn’t need more. If it lived, the baby they 
were expecting would certainly be an only child. Arnette’s mother had 
only two children, one of whom had fathered only defectives. In addi -
tion, these later Morgans were not as proliﬁc as the earlier ones. They 
were not like 
Zechariah Morgan (aka Big Papa, né Coffee) m. Mindy Flood 
[nota bene: Anna Flood’s great-aunt] 
who had nine of fourteen children survive. Pat ran her ﬁnger over their 
names: Pryor Morgan, Rector Morgan, Shepherd Morgan, Ella Mor -
gan, Loving Morgan, Selanie Morgan, Governor Morgan, Queen 
Morgan and Scout Morgan. Scooting up the margin in Skrip black 
ink, one of her earlier notes read: “It took seven births for them to 
get around to giving a female child an administrative, authoritative-
sounding name, and I bet they called her ‘Queenie.’ ” Another com -
ment, threaded out from Zechariah’s name and led by arrows, spread 
191 P ARADISE  
to the back of the page: “He renamed himself. Coffee was his birth 
name—a misspelling of Koﬁ, probably. And since no Louisiana Mor -
gans or any of the Haven people had worked for any whites named 
Morgan, he must have chosen his last name as well as his ﬁrst from 
something or someplace he liked. Zacharias, father of John the Bap -
tist? or the Zechariah who had visions? The one who saw scrolls of 
curses and women in baskets; the one who saw Joshua’s ﬁlthy clothes 
changed into rich ones; who saw the result of disobedience. The pun -
ishment for not showing mercy or compassion was a scattering among 
all nations, and pleasant land made desolate. All of that would ﬁt 
nicely for Zechariah Morgan: the curse, the women stuffed into a bas -
ket with a lid of lead and hidden away in a house, but especially the 
scattering. The scattering would have frightened him. The breakup of 
the group or tribe or consortium of families or, in Coffee’s case, the 
splitting up of a contingent of families who had lived with or near each 
other since before Bunker Hill. He would not have had trouble imag -
ining the scariness of having everybody he knew thrown apart, thrown 
into different places in a foreign land and becoming alien to each 
other. He would have been frightened of not knowing a jawline that 
signiﬁed one family, a cast of eye or a walk that identiﬁed another. Of 
not being able to see yourself re-formed in a third- or fourth-generation 
grandchild. Of not knowing where the generations before him were 
buried or how to get in touch with them if you didn’t know. That 
would be the Zechariah Coffee would have chosen for himself. That 
would have appealed to him if he had heard some mighty preacher tell 
the story of Joshua crowned. He would not name himself after Joshua, 
the king, but after the witness to whom God and angels spoke on a reg -
ular basis about things Coffee knew something about.” 
When she asked Steward where his grandfather got his last name, 
he’d grunted and said he thought it was Moyne originally, not Morgan. 
Or Le Moyne or something, but, “Some folks called him Black Cof -
fee. We called him Big Papa. Called my daddy Big Daddy,” as though 
that ended it. Insulted like, because he himself wasn’t a papa or a 
daddy, big or otherwise. Because the Morgan line was crop feeble. 
One of Zechariah’s (Big Papa’s) sons, Rector, had seven children with 
his wife, Beck, but only four survived: Elder, the twins Deacon and 
192 Patricia  
Steward, and K.D.’s mother, Ruby. Elder died leaving his wife, Susan -
nah (Smith) Morgan, with six children—all of whom moved from 
Haven to northern states. Zechariah would have hated that. Moving 
would have been “scattering” to him. And he was right, for sure 
enough, from then on the fertility shriveled, even while the bounty 
multiplied. The more money, the fewer children; the fewer children, 
the more money to give the fewer children. Assuming you amassed 
enough of it, which was why the richest ones—Deek and Steward— 
were so keen on the issue of K.D.’s marriage. Or so Pat supposed. 
All of them, however, each and every one of the intact nine fami -
lies, had the little mark she had chosen to put after their names: 8-R. 
An abbreviation for eight-rock, a deep deep level in the coal mines. 
Blue-black people, tall and graceful, whose clear, wide eyes gave no 
sign of what they really felt about those who weren’t 8-rock like them. 
Descendants of those who had been in Louisiana Territory when it was 
French, when it was Spanish, when it was French again, when it was 
sold to Jefferson and when it became a state in 1812. Who spoke a 
patois part Spanish, part French, part English, and all their own. 
Descendants of those who, after the Civil War, had deﬁed or hidden 
from whites doing all they could to force them to stay and work as 
sharecroppers in Louisiana. Descendants of those whose worthiness 
was so endemic it got three of their children elected to rule in state 
legislatures and county ofﬁces: who, when thrown out of ofﬁce with -
out ceremony or proof of wrongdoing, refused to believe what they 
guessed was the real reason that made it impossible for them to ﬁnd 
other mental labor. Almost all of the Negro men chased or invited out 
of ofﬁce (in Mississippi, in Louisiana, in Georgia) got less inﬂuential 
but still white-collar work following the purges of 1875. One from 
South Carolina ended his days as a street sweeper. But they alone 
(Zechariah Morgan and Juvenal DuPres in Louisiana, Drum Black-
horse in Mississippi) were reduced to penury and/or ﬁeld labor. Fif -
teen years of begging for sweatwork in cotton, lumber or rice after ﬁve 
glorious years remaking a country. They must have suspected yet dared 
not say that their misfortune’s misfortune was due to the one and only 
feature that distinguished them from their Negro peers. Eight-rock. In 
1890 they had been in the country for one hundred and twenty years. 
193 P ARADISE  
So they took that history, those years, each other and their uncorrupt -
ible worthiness and walked to the “Run.” Walked from Mississippi and 
Louisiana to Oklahoma and got to the place described in advertise -
ments carefully folded into their shoes or creased into the brims of 
their hats only to be shooed away. This time the clarity was clear: for 
ten generations they had believed the division they fought to close was 
free against slave and rich against poor. Usually, but not always, white 
against black. Now they saw a new separation: light-skinned against 
black. Oh, they knew there was a difference in the minds of whites, but 
it had not struck them before that it was of consequence, serious con -
sequence, to Negroes themselves. Serious enough that their daughters 
would be shunned as brides; their sons chosen last; that colored men 
would be embarrassed to be seen socially with their sisters. The sign 
of racial purity they had taken for granted had become a stain. The 
scattering that alarmed Zechariah because he believed it would 
deplete them was now an even more dangerous level of evil, for if they 
broke apart and were disvalued by the impure, then, certain as death, 
those ten generations would disturb their children’s peace throughout 
eternity. 
Pat was convinced that when the subsequent generations of 8-rock 
males did scatter, just as Zechariah feared, into the army, it could 
have been over and done with. Should have been over and done with. 
The rejection, which they called the Disallowing, was a burn whose 
scar tissue was numb by 1949, wasn’t it? Oh, no. Those that survived 
that particular war came right back home, saw what had become of 
Haven, heard about the missing testicles of other colored soldiers; 
about medals being torn off by gangs of rednecks and Sons of the 
Confederacy—and recognized the Disallowing, Part Two. It would 
have been like watching a parade banner that said war-weary sol -
diers ! not welcome home ! So they did it again. And just as the 
original wayfarers never sought another colored townsite after being 
cold-shouldered at the ﬁrst, this generation joined no organization, 
fought no civil battle. They consolidated the 8-rock blood and, 
haughty as ever, moved farther west. The New Fathers: Deacon Mor -
gan, Steward Morgan, William Cato, Ace Flood, Aaron Poole, Nathan 
DuPres, Moss DuPres, Arnold Fleetwood, Ossie Beauchamp, Harper 
194 Patricia  
Jury, Sargeant Person, John Seawright, Edward Sands and Pat’s father, 
Roger Best, who was the ﬁrst to violate the blood rule. The one nobody 
admitted existed. The one established when the Mississippi ﬂock 
noticed and remembered that the Disallowing came from fair-skinned 
colored men. Blue-eyed, gray-eyed yellowmen in good suits. They 
were kind, though, as the story went. Gave them food and blankets; 
took up a collection for them; but were unmoving in their refusal to 
let the 8-rocks stay longer than a night’s rest. The story went that 
Zechariah Morgan and Drum Blackhorse forbade the women to eat 
the food. That Jupe Cato left the blankets in the tent, with the col -
lected offering of three dollars and nine cents neatly stacked on top. 
But Soane said her grandmother, Celeste Blackhorse, sneaked back 
and got the food (but not the money), secretly passing it to her sister 
Sally Blackhorse, to Bitty Cato and Praise Compton, to distribute to 
the children. 
So the rule was set and lived a quietly throbbing life because it was 
never spoken of, except for the hint in words Zechariah forged for the 
Oven. More than a rule. A conundrum: “Beware the Furrow of His 
Brow,” in which the “You” (understood), vocative case, was not a com -
mand to the believers but a threat to those who had disallowed them. It 
must have taken him months to think up those words—just so—to 
have multiple meanings: to appear stern, urging obedience to God, 
but slyly not identifying the understood proper noun or specifying 
what the Furrow might cause to happen or to whom. So the teenagers 
Misner organized who wanted to change it to “Be the Furrow of His 
Brow” were more insightful than they knew. Look what they did to 
Menus, forcing him to give back or return the woman he brought 
home to marry. The pretty sandy-haired girl from Virginia. Menus lost 
(or was forced to give up) the house he’d bought for her and hadn’t 
been sober since. And though they attributed his weekend drunks to 
his Vietnam memories, and although they laughed with him as he 
clipped their hair, Pat knew love in its desperate state when she saw it. 
She believed she had seen it in Menus’ eyes as well as in her father’s, 
poorly veiled by his business ventures. 
Before she put away the K.D. pages, Pat scribbled in the margin: 
“Somebody beat up Arnette. The Convent women, as folks say? Or, 
195 P ARADISE  
quiet as it’s kept, K.D.?” Then she picked up the ﬁle for Best, Roger. 
On the back of the title page, labeled: 
Roger Best m. Delia 
she wrote: “Daddy, they don’t hate us because Mama was your ﬁrst 
customer. They hate us because she looked like a cracker and was 
bound to have cracker-looking children like me, and although I mar -
ried Billy Cato, who was an 8-rock like you, like them, I passed the skin 
on to my daughter, as you and everybody knew I would. Notice how a 
lot of those Sands who married Seawrights are careful to make sure 
that their children marry into other 8-rock families. We were the ﬁrst 
visible glitch, but there was an invisible one that had nothing to do 
with skin color. I know all of the couples wanted preacher-attended 
marriages, and many had them. But there were many others that prac -
ticed what Fairy DuPres called ‘takeovers.’ A young widow might take 
over a single man’s house. A widower might ask a friend or a distant 
relative if he could take over a young girl who had no prospects. Like 
Billy’s family. His mother, Fawn, born a Blackhorse, was taken over by 
his grandmother’s uncle, August Cato. Or, to put it another way, Billy’s 
mother was wife to her own great-uncle. Or another way: my hus-
band’s father, August Cato, is also his grandmother’s (Bitty Cato Black-
horse’s) uncle and therefore Billy’s great-granduncle as well. (Bitty 
Cato’s father, Sterl Cato, took over a woman named Honesty Jones. It 
must have been she who insisted on naming her daughter Friendship, 
and she was probably riled at hearing the child called Bitty for the rest 
of her life.) Since Bitty Cato married Peter Blackhorse, and since her 
daughter, Fawn Blackhorse, was wife to Bitty’s uncle, and since Peter 
Blackhorse is Billy Cato’s grandfather—well, you can see the problem 
with blood rules. It’s distant, I know, and August Cato was an old 
man when he took over little Fawn Blackhorse. And he never would 
have done it without Blackhorse permission. And he never would have 
received permission if he had a loose reputation because coupling out -
side marriage or takeovers was not only frowned upon, it could get you 
ostracized so completely it behooved the fornicators to pack up and 
leave. As may have been the case (it would explain the line through his 
196 Patricia  
name) with Ethan Blackhorse—Drum’s youngest brother—and a 
woman named Solace, and certainly was believed to be the case with 
Martha Stone, Menus’ mother (although Harper Jury couldn’t settle 
on whom he thought his wife betrayed him with). So August Cato 
shunned temptation or any thought of looking outside the families and 
asked Thomas and Peter Blackhorse for Peter’s daughter, Fawn. And 
maybe his advanced age was why she had just the one child, my hus -
band, Billy. Still, the Blackhorse blood is there, and that makes my 
daughter, Billie Delia, a ﬁfth? cousin to Soane and Dovey, because 
Peter Blackhorse was brother to Thomas Blackhorse and Sally Black-
horse, and Thomas Blackhorse was Soane’s and Dovey’s father. Now, 
Sally Blackhorse married Aaron Poole and had thirteen children. One 
of whom Aaron was going to name Deep, but Sally pitched a ﬁt, so 
Aaron, with a humor more grim than anybody would have thought, 
named him Deeper. But two others of those thirteen children Billie 
Delia is in love with, and there is something wrong with that but other 
than number and the blood rules I can’t ﬁgure out what.” 
Pat underscored the last ﬁve words then wrote down her mother’s 
name, drew a line under it, enclosed it in a heart and continued: 
“The women really tried, Mama. They really did. Kate’s mother, 
Catherine Jury, you remember her, and Fairy DuPres (she’s dead 
now), along with Lone and Dovey Morgan and Charity Flood. But 
none of them could drive then. You must have believed that deep 
down they hated you, but not all of them, maybe none of them, 
because they begged the men to go to the Convent to get help. I heard 
them. Dovey Morgan was crying as she left to ﬁnd somebody, going 
from house to house: to Harper Jury, Catherine’s own husband, to 
Charity’s husband, Ace Flood, and to Sargeant Person’s (how come 
that ignorant Negro doesn’t know his name is Pierson?). All of the 
excuses were valid, reasonable. Even with their wives begging they 
came up with excuses because they looked down on you, Mama, I 
know it, and despised Daddy for marrying a wife with no last name, a 
wife without people, a wife of sunlight skin, a wife of racial tampering. 
Both midwives were in trouble (it was coming too soon, legs folded 
underneath) and all they wanted was to get one of the nuns at the Con -
vent. Miss Fairy said one of them used to work in a hospital. Catherine 
197 P ARADISE  
Jury went to Soane’s to see if Deek was there. He wasn’t, but Dovey 
was. It was Dovey who went to Seawright’s, then Fleetwood’s. Went to 
every house in walking distance. The Moss DuPreses lived way way 
out. So did Nathan (who would have hitched Hard Goods and gal -
loped to Jesus for help). So did Steward, the Pooles, the Sands and 
the rest. Finally they got Senior Pulliam to agree. But by the time he 
got his shoes tied it was too late. Miss Fairy rushed from your bedside 
to Pulliam’s house and hollered through his door—too exhausted to 
knock, too angry to step inside—and said, ‘You can take your shoes 
back off, Senior! Might as well get your preacher clothes ready so 
you’ll be in time for the funeral!’ Then she was gone from there. 
“When Daddy got back everybody was worried sick about what to 
do and how long the bodies could last before, father or no father, hus -
band or no husband, you both had to go in the ground. But Daddy 
came back the second day. No time for a decent wake. So you were his 
ﬁrst job. And a wonderful job he did too. You were beautiful. With the 
baby in the crook of your arm. You would have been so proud of him. 
“He doesn’t blame anybody except himself for being at mortuary 
graduation. We have quarreled about it and he doesn’t agree with me 
that those 8-rock men didn’t want to go and bring a white into town; or 
else didn’t want to drive out to a white’s house begging for help; or else 
they just despised your pale skin so much they thought of reasons why 
they could not go. Daddy says more than one woman has died in child -
birth and I say, who? So the mother without one died and the baby 
whom you planned to name Faustine, if a girl, or Richard, after 
Daddy’s oldest brother, if a boy, died too. It was a girl, Mama. Faustine. 
My baby sister. We would have grown up together. Patricia and Faus -
tine. Too light, maybe, but together it would not have mattered to us. 
We’d be a team. I have no aunts or uncles, remember, because all of 
Daddy’s sisters and brothers died of what they called walking pneu -
monia but what must have been the 1919 inﬂuenza epidemic. So I 
married Billy Cato partly because he was beautiful, partly because he 
made me laugh, and partly (mostly?) because he had the midnight 
skin of the Catos and the Blackhorses, along with that Blackhorse 
feature of stick-straight hair. Like Soane’s and Dovey’s hair, and like 
198 Patricia  
Easter and Scout had. But he died, Billy did, and I took my lightish but 
not whiteish baby and moved back in your pretty little house with the 
mortuary and your headstone in back and have been drylongso teach -
ing the children who call me Miss Best using Daddy’s last name as 
everybody else does, so short was the time I was Pat Cato.” 
The words had long ago covered the back of the page, so she was 
using fresh sheets to continue: 
“I may as well tell you that except for you and K.D.’s mother, 
nobody in Ruby has ever died. Please note I said in Ruby and they are 
real proud about that believing they are blessed and all because after 
1953 anybody who died did it in Europe or Korea or someplace out -
side this town. Even Sweetie’s children are still alive and God knows 
there is no reason they should be. Well, crazy as it sounds, I believe the 
claim of immortality is this town’s rebuke against Daddy’s mortuary 
business, since he has to wait for our killed-in-actions or somebody out 
at the Convent or an accident someplace else, otherwise his ambu -
lance is never a hearse. (When Billy died there was nothing left to bury 
except some “effects,” including a gold ring too twisted to poke a ﬁnger 
through.) They think Daddy deserves rebuke because he broke the 
blood rule ﬁrst, and I wouldn’t put it past them to refuse to die just to 
keep Daddy from success. As it turned out, war dead and accidents in 
other towns (Miss Fairy died on a trip back to Haven; Ace Flood died 
in the Demby hospital but was buried in Haven) were all the work 
Daddy has had and it is hardly enough. Neither is the ambulance busi -
ness, so I work hard to convince him that the money the town pays me 
for teaching is just household money and he doesn’t have to borrow 
anymore on his shares in Deek’s bank and should forget gasoline sta -
tions and what all.” 
Leaning back in the chair, Pat folded her hands behind her head, 
wondering what was going to happen when more people got as old as 
Nathan or Lone. Then would her father’s craft be required or would 
they do what they did on the way out of Louisiana? Bury them where 
they fell. Or were they right? Was death blocked from entering Ruby? 
Patricia was tired now and ready for sleep, but she couldn’t let Delia go 
just yet. 
199 P ARADISE  
“That was some ride, Mama, from Haven to here. You and me, 
Mama, among those skinny blue-black giants, neither they nor their 
wives staring at your long brown hair, your honey-speckled eyes. Did 
Daddy tell you, Don’t worry your head; it was going to be all right? 
Remember how they needed you, used you to go into a store to get 
supplies or a can of milk while they parked around the corner? That 
was the only thing your skin was good for. Otherwise it bothered them. 
Reminded them of why Haven existed, of why a new town had to take 
its place. The one-drop law the whites made up was hard to live by if 
nobody could tell it was there. When we drove through a town, or 
when a sheriff’s car was near, Daddy told us to get down, to lie on the 
ﬂoor of the car, because it would have been no use telling a stranger 
that you were colored and worse to say you were his wife. Did Soane or 
Dovey, new brides too, talk woman-talk with you? You thought you 
were pregnant again and so did they. So did you talk together about 
how you all felt? Make tea for hemorrhoids, give one another salt to 
lick or copper dirt to eat in secret? I craved baking soda when I carried 
Billie Delia. Did you when you carried me? Did the older women 
with children too advise you, like Aaron’s wife, Sally, with four chil -
dren already? What about Alice Pulliam—her husband wasn’t a rev -
erend yet but he had already heard the Call and decided to become 
one so they must have had some charitable, some godly feelings then 
when they were young. Did they make you welcome right away, or did 
they all wait for the Oven to be reassembled or, the following year, 
when the stream came back, baptize you just so they could speak to 
you directly, look you in the eyes? 
“What did Daddy say to you at that AME Zion picnic? The one 
held for colored soldiers stationed at the base in Tennessee. How could 
either of you tell what the other was saying? He talking Louisiana, you 
speaking Tennessee. The music so different, the sound coming from a 
different part of the body. It must have been like hearing lyrics set to 
scores by two different composers. But when you made love he must 
have said I love you and you understood that and it was true, too, 
because I have seen the desperation in his eyes ever since—no matter 
what business venture he thinks up.” 
200 Patricia  
Pat stopped and rubbed the callus on her middle ﬁnger. Her 
elbow and shoulder ached from gripping the pen so hard. Across the 
hall, through the bedroom door, she could hear her father snoring. 
As always she wished him pleasant dreams—something to assuage the 
unhappiness of his days, days spent trying to please, to make up for. 
Except for marrying her mother, she couldn’t think what rule he had 
broken that made him so eager for the approval of those who disre -
spected him. He had described to her once what Haven looked like 
when he got out of the army. He said he sat on his father’s porch 
coughing, so nobody would know he was weeping for us. His father, 
Fulton Best, and his mother, Olive, were inside, reading with great sor -
row the applications he had ﬁlled out for the G.I. Bill funding. He 
wanted a college education so he could go to medical school, but he 
was also their only surviving child, all the others having died in the ﬂu 
epidemic. His parents could not bear the thought of either his leaving 
again or his staying in a town slipping into erasure forever in every 
place except the heart. He was looking up and down the cracked con -
crete of Main Street when Ace Flood and Harper Jury walked up to 
him, saying there was a plan. Deek and Steward Morgan had a plan. 
When he heard what it was, the ﬁrst thing he did was write to the 
hazel-eyed girl with light-brown hair who’d had his child during the 
war. Good thing he didn’t tell them about us. They would have dis -
suaded him from marriage the way, later on, they did Menus. Maybe 
he knew they would, which is why he just sent for us. “Darling Delia, 
Come on. Right now. Here is the money order. I am going to have a lot 
of trouble keeping my heart quiet. Until you all get here I will be a 
crazy man. . . .” Their jaws m ust have dropped when we arrived, but 
other than Steward, nobody said anything directly. They didn’t have 
to. Olive took to her bed. Fulton kept grunting and rubbing his knees. 
Only Steward had the gall to say out loud, “He’s bringing along the 
dung we leaving behind.” Dovey shushed him. Soane too. But Fairy 
DuPres cursed him, saying, “God don’t love ugly ways. Watch out He 
don’t deny you what you love too.” A remark Dovey must have thought 
about a lot until 1964, when the curse was completed. But they were 
just women, and what they said was easily ignored by good brave men 
201 P ARADISE  
on their way to Paradise. They got there, too, and eventually had the 
satisfaction of seeing the dung buried. Most of it anyway. Some of it is 
still aboveground, instructing their grandchildren in a level of intelli -
gence their elders will never acquire. 
Pat sucked her teeth and pushed aside the Best ﬁle. She selected 
a composition notebook and without label or introduction continued 
to write. 
“She won’t listen to me. Not one word. She works in Demby at a 
clinic—cleaning up, I think, but she makes out like she’s a nurse’s aide 
because of the uniform she has to wear. I don’t know how she lives. I 
mean she has a room, she says, in the house of a nice family. I don’t 
believe it. Not all of it anyway. One of those Poole boys—both of them, 
probably—is visiting her. I know because the littlest one, Dina, told 
the class about her big brother showing her a house with a Santa Claus 
and Christmas lights all over the porch. Well, that was someplace 
other than Ruby, for sure. She is lying and I would rather be bit by the 
serpent himself than have a lying child. I didn’t mean to hit her so 
hard. I didn’t know I had. I just meant to stop her lying mouth telling 
me she didn’t do anything. I saw them. All three of them back behind 
the Oven and she was in the middle. Plus I am the one who washes 
sheets around here.” 
Pat stopped, put down her pen and, covering her eyes with her 
hand, tried to separate what she had seen from what she feared to see. 
And what did the sheets have to do with it? Was there blood where 
there should not have been or no blood where there should have 
been? It was more than a year ago, and she thought everything was 
seared in her memory. The ﬁght took place in October of 1973. After -
wards Billie Delia ran off and stayed at the Convent for two weeks and 
one day. She came back during the morning session, while Pat was 
teaching the under twelves, and stayed long enough to say she wasn’t 
going to. They’d had ugly, hateful words, but both were afraid to get 
near the other lest the quarrel get physical as it had before. She left 
with one of those Poole boys and didn’t come back till early this year to 
describe her job and write down her address. Since then Pat had seen 
her twice: once in March and then at Arnette’s wedding, where she 
202 Patricia  
was bridesmaid and maid of honor both, since Arnette would not have 
anybody else, and no other girl wanted the honor anyway if it meant 
walking down the aisle with Billie Delia. Or so Pat thought. She had 
gone to the wedding, not the reception, but she hadn’t missed a thing 
since she had a perfect view of the goings-on at the Oven with those 
girls from the Convent. She saw them. She saw those Poole boys. And 
she saw Billie Delia sit down and talk to one of the girls like they were 
old friends. She saw Reverend Pulliam and Steward Morgan argue 
with the girls, and when they drove off she saw Billie Delia throw her 
bouquet in Anna’s trash can before she strolled off, Apollo and Brood 
Poole in tow. 
Billie Delia left the next day in her very own car and never said a 
word to her about the wedding, the reception, the Convent girl or any -
thing. Pat tried to remember how that pressing iron got into her hand, 
what had been said that had her running up the stairs with a 1950s GE 
electric iron called Royal Ease clutched in her ﬁngers to slam against 
her daughter’s head. She, the gentlest of souls, missed killing her own 
daughter by inches. She who loved children and protected them not 
only from each other but from too stern parents lunged after her own 
daughter. She who had trained herself to reasoning and soft manners 
and discretion and dignity, falling down the stairs and bruising herself 
so badly she had to cancel two days of class. Educated but self-taught 
also to make sure that everybody knew that the bastard-born daughter 
of the woman with sunlight skin and no last name was not only lovely 
but of great worth and inestimable value. Trying to understand how 
she could have picked up that pressing iron, Pat realized that ever 
since Billie Delia was an infant, she thought of her as a liability some -
how. Vulnerable to the possibility of not being quite as much of a lady 
as Patricia Cato would like. Was it that business of pulling down her 
panties in the street? Billie Delia was only three then. Pat knew that 
had her daughter been an 8-rock, they would not have held it against 
her. They would have seen it for what it was—only an innocent child 
would have done that, surely. Have I missed something? Was there 
something else? But the question for her now in the silence of this here 
night was whether she had defended Billie Delia or sacriﬁced her. And 
203 P ARADISE  
was she sacriﬁcing her still? The Royal Ease in her hand as she ran up 
the stairs was there to smash the young girl that lived in the minds 
of the 8-rocks, not the girl her daughter was. 
Pat licked her bottom lip, tasted salt and wondered who exactly 
the tears were for. 
Nathan DuPres, believed to be the oldest male in Ruby, welcomed the 
audience. He disputed the claim of seniority every year, pointing to his 
cousin Moss, then saying Reverend Simon Cary was a more suitable 
choice. But he let the town persuade him in the end because Reverend 
Cary talked too long, besides which he was not among the ﬁrst families, 
so his arrival was associated not with World War II but with Korea. A 
stalwart man of such loving-kindness even Steward Morgan admired 
him, Nathan had married Elder Morgan’s daughter, Mirth. Because 
they had no surviving children, he deeply cherished other people’s: 
hosting the annual Children’s Day picnic, ﬁne-tuning the rehearsals, 
keeping cough drops and ﬁreballs in his pockets to pass out. 
Now, smelling slightly of the horse he’d just dismounted, he 
climbed the platform and surveyed the audience. Nathan cleared his 
throat and surprised himself. Whatever he’d prepared to say had left 
him and the words he did say seemed appropriate to some other event. 
“I was ﬁve,” he said, “when we left Louisiana and sixty-ﬁve when 
I hopped in the truck leaving Haven behind for this here new place. I 
know I wouldn’t have done it if Mirth was alive or any of our children 
was still aboveground. You all know my babies—all of them—was took 
by a tornado in 1922. Me and Mirth found them in a stranger’s wheat 
ﬁeld. But I never regretted coming here. Never. There is honey in this 
land sweeter than any I know of, and I have cut cane in places where 
the dirt itself tasted like sugar, so that’s saying a heap. No, I never had a 
gnat-minute’s worth of regret. But there’s a sadness in me now. Maybe 
in this season of my Lord’s birth I’ll learn what it is. This parch in my 
throat. The water that stays in my eyes. I know I’ve seen more years 
than God usually allows a man, but this dryness is new. The eye water 
too. When I run my mind over it, all I can come up with is a dream I 
had a while back.” 
204 Patricia  
In the next-to-last row, Lone DuPres sat next to Richard Misner, 
Anna on his other side. She leaned forward to glance at Anna and 
learn whether she, too, was losing her mind. Anna smiled but did not 
return her look, so she sat back to endure another one of old Nathan’s 
incoherent dreams. 
Nathan ran his ﬁngers over his head, closed his eyes as if to get the 
details straight. 
“Was an Indian come up to me in a bean row. Cheyenne, I 
believe. The vines were green, tender. The blossoms coming out all 
over. He looked at the row and shook his head, sorrowful-like. Then he 
told me too bad the water was bad; said there was plenty of it but it was 
foul. I said, But look here, look at all the ﬂowers. Looks like a top crop 
to me. He said, The tallest cotton don’t yield the best crop; besides, 
those ﬂowers the wrong color. They’s red. And I looked and sure 
enough they was turning pink, then red. Like blood drops. Scared me 
some. But when I looked back he was gone. And the petals was white 
again. I reckon that sighting is like this here story we going to tell again 
this evening. It shows the strength of our crop if we understand it. But 
it can break us if we don’t. And bloody us too. May God bless the pure 
and holy and may nothing keep us apart from each other nor from the 
One who does the blessing. Amen.” 
When Nathan left the platform, amidst murmurs of kindness if 
not gratitude, Richard Misner took advantage of the pause to whisper 
something to Anna and leave his seat. He was hoping to relieve 
nascent waves of the claustrophobia that had not plagued him since he 
was jailed with thirty-eight others in a tiny cell in Alabama. He had 
embarrassed himself then, because the sweat and nausea signaled fear 
to his companions. And it was a hard lesson knowing that whatever 
risks he took, however eager he was for the dangerous confrontation, a 
crowded cell could humiliate him before teenagers without pity. Now, 
feeling the onslaught of suffocation in this tightly packed schoolhouse, 
he joined Pat Best, standing in the hall watching the play and the audi -
ence through the door. A long table of cakes, cookies and punch lined 
the wall behind her. 
“Hello, Reverend.” Pat did not look at him but adjusted her body 
to accommodate him in the doorway. 
205 P ARADISE  
“Evening, Pat,” he said, blotting moisture from his neck with his 
handkerchief. “Out here is better for me.” 
“Me too. See everything from here without stretching or peeping 
between two hats.” 
They looked over the heads of the audience as the curtains, made 
of percale sheets—laundered and carefully ironed—wavered. Chil -
dren in white surplices ﬁled through the parting, the perfection of 
their serious faces and ﬂawless hair undone occasionally by a knee 
sock sliding down to an ankle or a bow tie twisted to the right. After a 
glance at Kate Golightly they took a uniform breath for O holy night, 
the stars are brightly shinin g... 
At the second verse Richard Misner leaned over to Pat. “Mind if I 
ask you something?” 
“No. Go ahead.” She thought he was going to ask for a donation, 
because he had been having difﬁculty raising money (in the quantities 
he hoped for) to aid the legal defense of four teenagers arrested in Nor -
man and charged with possession, resisting, arson, disorderly, inciting 
and whatever else the prosecution could ferret out of its statutes to 
level against black boys who said No or thought about it. They had 
been in jail, Richard Misner told his congregation, for almost two 
years. When arraigned, they’d been behind bars for twenty months. 
The trial date was about to be set, and lawyers needed to be paid for 
services already rendered and more to come. So far Richard had col -
lected only what the women had given. Women who thought more 
about the pain felt by the boys’ mothers than of the injustice of their 
sons’ situation. The men, however, Fleetwoods, Pulliam, Sargeant 
Person and the Morgans, had been adamant in their refusal. Clearly 
Richard had not carefully enough shaped his plea. He should have 
built a prodigal sons foundation rather than a political one. Then, as 
he stood outside Calvary, continuing his requests, he would not have 
had to listen to “I don’t hold with violence,” from men who had han -
dled guns all their lives. Or “Little illegal niggers with guns and no 
home training need to be in jail.” This from Steward, of course. How -
ever much Richard insisted they had no guns, that demonstrations 
were not illegal, the men kept their wallets closed. Pat decided, if asked 
206 Patricia  
directly, to donate as much as she could. It was pleasant to think of his 
needing her generosity, so she was annoyed to learn that that was not at 
all what was on Richard Misner’s mind. 
“I’m trying to smooth a situation out at the Pooles’, and I think I’d 
do well to talk to Billie Delia, if you don’t mind. Is she here tonight?” 
Pat held on to her elbows and turned to look at him. “Can’t help 
you, Reverend.” 
“You sure?” 
“I’m sure that whatever’s going on out there has nothing to do 
with Billie Delia. Besides, she doesn’t live here anymore. Moved to 
Demby.” She would have liked to stop being so hostile to him, but 
with the mention of her daughter’s relationship with those Poole boys, 
she couldn’t control it. 
“Her name’s come up once or twice. But Wisdom Poole won’t 
give me anything to go on. Something’s tearing that family apart.” 
“They don’t like prying, Reverend. It’s a thing about Ruby.” 
“I understand that but something like this has a way of spreading, 
touching more than one family. When I ﬁrst came here it was plain: if 
there was a problem brewing, a delegation was formed to see about it. 
Keep people from falling out with one another. Seen it with my own 
eyes and been a party to it too.” 
“I know.”  
“This community used to be tight as wax.”  
“It still is. In a crisis. But they keep to themselves otherwise.”  
“Don’t you mean ‘we’? ‘We keep to ourselves’?”  
“If I did, would you be asking me to explain things?”  
“Pat, please. Don’t take anything I say amiss. I just remembered  
that the young people in Bible class say ‘they’ too when talking about 
their parents.” 
“Bible class? More like a war class. Kind of military, from what 
I hear.” 
“Militant, maybe. Not military.” 
“No budding Panthers?” 
“Is that what you think?” 
“I don’t know what to think.” 
207 P ARADISE  
“Well, let me tell you. Unlike most of the folks here, we read news -
papers and different kinds of books. We keep up. And yes, we discuss 
strategies of defense. Not aggression. Defense.” 
“They know the difference?” 
He didn’t have to reply right away because applause began and 
lasted until the ﬁnal member of the children’s choir disappeared 
behind the curtain. 
Someone turns off the ceiling lights. Quiet coughing domesticates 
the dark. Slowly, on a well-oiled pulley, the curtains part. Under lights 
positioned in the wings, throwing large shadows behind them, four ﬁg -
ures in felt hats and too big suits stand at a table, counting giant dollar 
bills. The face of each one is hidden by a yellow and white mask fea -
turing gleaming eyes and snarling lips, red as a fresh wound. Above a 
sign tacked to the table front, which reads inn, they count money, 
make slurping noises and do not stop when a parade of holy families 
dressed in torn clothes and moving in a slow two-step approaches 
them. Seven couples line up before the table of money. The boys carry 
staffs; the girls cuddle baby dolls. 
Misner looked at them and, giving himself more time to think of a 
reply to Pat’s question, concentrated on identifying the children 
onstage. The four youngest Cary girls: Hope, Chaste, Lovely and Pure; 
Dina Poole; and one of Pious DuPres’ daughters—Linda. Then the 
boys, manfully grasping staffs while they two-stepped toward the 
money counters. Peace and Solarine Jury’s two grandsons, Ansel and 
one they called Fruit; Joe-Thomas Poole paired with his sister Dina; 
Drew and Harriet Person’s son, James; Payne Sands’ boy, Lorcas, and 
two of Timothy Seawright’s grandsons, Steven and Michael. Two of 
the masked ones were obviously Beauchamps—Royal and Destry, 
ﬁfteen- and sixteen-year-olds who were already over six feet tall—but 
he wasn’t sure of the other two. This was the ﬁrst time he had attended 
the play. It was held two weeks before Christmas, when he returned to 
Georgia for his annual visit to his family. This year the trip was post -
poned because an all-family reunion was scheduled for New Year’s. He 
would take Anna, if she agreed, let the folks look her over and, he sup -
posed, let her look them over. He had hinted to the bishops that he was 
208 Patricia  
up for a new parish. Nothing urgent. But he was not sure he was well 
used in Ruby. He had thought any place was ﬁne as long as there were 
young people to be taught, to be told, that Christ was judge and war -
rior too. That whites not only had no patent on Christianity; they were 
often its obstacle. That Jesus had been freed from white religion, and 
he wanted these kids to know that they did not have to beg for respect; 
it was already in them, and they needed only to display it. But the resis -
tance he’d found in Ruby was wearing him out. More and more his 
students were being chastised about the beliefs he helped instill. 
Now Pat Best—with whom he’d taught Negro History every Thursday 
afternoon—was chipping away at his Bible class, confusing self-respect 
for arrogance, preparedness for disobedience. Did she think education 
was knowing just enough to get a job? She didn’t seem to trust these 
Ruby hardheads with the future any more than he did, but neither did 
she encourage change. Negro history and lists of old-time achieve -
ments were enough for her but not for this generation. Somebody had 
to talk to them, and somebody had to listen to them. Otherwis e... 
“You know better than anybody how smart these young people are. 
Better than anybod y . . .” His vo ice trailed off under “Silent Night.” 
“You think what I teach them isn’t good enough?” 
Had she read his mind? “Of course it’s good. It’s just not enough. 
The world is big, and we’re part of that bigness. They want to know 
about Africa—” 
“Oh, please, Reverend. Don’t go sentimental on me.” 
“If you cut yourself off from the roots, you’ll wither.” 
“Roots that ignore the branches turn into termite dust.” 
“Pat,” he said with mild surprise. “You despise Africa.” 
“No, I don’t. It just doesn’t mean anything to me.” 
“What does, Pat? What does mean something to you?” 
“The periodic chart of elements and valences.” 
“Sad,” he said. “Sad and cold.” Richard Misner turned away. 
Lorcas Sands leaves the group of families and in a loud but breaking 
voice addresses the masks: “Is there room?” 
209 P ARADISE  
The masks turn toward each other, then back to the supplicant, 
then back to each other, after which they roar, shaking their heads like 
angry lions. “Get on way from here! Get! There’s no room for you!” 
“But our wives are pregnant!” Lorcas points with the staff. 
“Our children going to die of thirst!” Pure Cary holds a doll aloft. 
The masked ones wag their heads and roar. 
“That was not a nice thing to say to me, Richard.” 
“I’m sorry?” 
“I am not sad or cold.” 
“I meant the chart, not you. Limiting your faith to molecules 
as if—” 
“I don’t limit anything. I just don’t believe some stupid devotion to 
a foreign country—and Africa is a foreign country, in fact it’s ﬁfty for -
eign countries—is a solution for these kids.” 
“Africa is our home, Pat, whether you like it or not.” 
“I’m really not interested, Richard. You want some foreign 
Negroes to identify with, why not South America? Or Germany, for 
that matter. They have some brown babies over there you could have 
a good time connecting with. Or is it just some kind of past with no 
slavery in it you’re looking for?” 
“Why not? There was a whole lot of life before slavery. And we 
ought to know what it is. If we’re going to get rid of the slave mentality, 
that is.” 
“You’re wrong, and if that’s your ﬁeld you’re plowing wet. Slavery 
is our past. Nothing can change that, certainly not Africa.” 
“We live in the world, Pat. The whole world. Separating us, isolat -
ing us—that’s always been their weapon. Isolation kills generations. It 
has no future.” 
“You think they don’t love their children?” 
Misner stroked his upper lip and heaved a long sigh. “I think they 
love them to death.” 
... 
210 Patricia  
Bobbing and bowing, the masked ones reach under the table and lift 
up big ﬂoppy cardboard squares pasted with pictures of food. “Here. 
Take this and get on out of here.” Throwing the food pictures on the 
ﬂoor, they laugh and jump about. The holy families rear back as 
though snakes were being tossed at them. Pointing foreﬁngers and 
waving ﬁsts, they chant: “God will crumble you. God will crumble 
you.” The audience hums agreement: “Yes He will. Yes He will.” 
“Into dust!” That was Lone DuPres. 
“Don’t you dare to mistake Him. Don’t you dare.” 
“Finer than ﬂour he’ll grind you.” 
“Say it, Lone.” 
“Strike you in the moment of His choosing!” 
And sure enough, the masked ﬁgures wobble and collapse to the 
ﬂoor, while the seven families turn away. Something within me that 
banishes pain; something within me I cannot explain. Their frail 
voices are accompanied by stronger ones in the audience, and at the 
last note more than a few are wiping their eyes. The families cluster 
campﬁre style to the right of the stage. The girls rock the dolls. Away in 
the manger, no crib for His head. Slowly from the wings a boy enters. 
He wears a wide hat and carries a leather bag. The families make a half 
circle behind him. The big-hat boy kneels and draws bottles and pack -
ages from the satchel, which he arranges on the ﬂoor. The little Lord 
Jesus lay down His sweet head. 
What’s the point? Richard asked himself. Just enjoy the show and let 
Pat alone. He wanted to discuss, not argue. He watched the children’s 
movements with mild affection at ﬁrst, then with growing interest. He 
had assumed it was in order to please as many children as possible that 
there were four innkeepers, seven Marys and Josephs. But perhaps 
there were other reasons. Seven holy families? Richard tapped Pat 
on the shoulder. “Who put this together? I thought you told me there 
were nine original families. Where the other two? And why only one 
Wise Man? And why is he putting the gifts back in the satchel?” 
“You don’t know where you are, do you?” 
211 P ARADISE  
“Well help me ﬁgure this place out. I know I’m an outsider, but 
I’m not an enemy.” 
“No, you’re not. But in this town those two words mean the same 
thing.” 
Amazing grace, how sweet the sound. In a shower of gold paper stars, 
the families lay down the dolls, the staffs and form a ring. The voices 
from the audience peal as one. I once was lost but now am found. 
Richard felt bitterness take the place of the nausea that had driven him 
from his seat. Twenty, thirty years from now, he thought, all sorts of 
people will claim pivotal, controlling, deﬁning positions in the rights 
movement. A few would be justiﬁed. Most would be frauds. What 
could not be gainsaid, but would remain invisible in the newspapers 
and the books he bought for his students, were the ordinary folk. The 
janitor who turned off the switch so the police couldn’t see; the grand -
mother who kept all the babies so the mothers could march; the back -
woods women with fresh towels in one hand and a shotgun in the 
other; the little children who carried batteries and food to secret meet -
ings; the ministers who kept whole churchfuls of hunted protesters 
calm till help came; the old who gathered up the broken bodies of the 
young; the young who spread their arms wide to protect the old from 
batons they could not possibly survive; parents who wiped the spit and 
tears from their children’s faces and said, “Never mind, honey. Never 
you mind. You are not and never will be a nigger, a coon, a jig, a jungle 
bunny nor any other thing white folks teach their children to say. What 
you are is God’s.” Yes, twenty, thirty years from now, those people will 
be dead or forgotten, their small stories part of no grand record or even 
its footnotes, although they were the ones who formed the spine on 
which the televised ones stood. Now, seven years after the murder of 
the man in whose stead he would happily have taken the sword, he was 
herding a ﬂock which believed not only that it had created the pasture 
it grazed but that grass from any other meadow was toxic. In their view 
Booker T. solutions trumped Du Bois problems every time. No matter 
212 Patricia  
who they are, he thought, or how special they think they are, a com -
munity with no politics is doomed to pop like Georgia fatwood. Was 
blind but now I see. 
“Do they?” It was phrased as a question but it sounded like a con -
clusion to Pat. 
“They are better than you think,” she said. 
“They are better than they think,” he told her. “Why are they satis -
ﬁed with so little?” 
“This is their home; mine too. Home is not a little thing.” 
“I’m not saying it is. But can’t you even imagine what it must feel 
like to have a true home? I don’t mean heaven. I mean a real earthly 
home. Not some fortress you bought and built up and have to keep 
everybody locked in or out. A real home. Not some place you went to 
and invaded and slaughtered people to get. Not some place you 
claimed, snatched because you got the guns. Not some place you stole 
from the people living there, but your own home, where if you go back 
past your great-great-grandparents, past theirs, and theirs, past the 
whole of Western history, past the beginning of organized knowledge, 
past pyramids and poison bows, on back to when rain was new, before 
plants forgot they could sing and birds thought they were ﬁsh, back 
when God said Good! Good!—there, right there where you know your 
own people were born and lived and died. Imagine that, Pat. That 
place. Who was God talking to if not to my people living in my 
home?” 
“You preaching, Reverend.” 
“No, I’m talking to you, Pat. I’m talking to you.” 
The ﬁnal clapping began when the children broke the circle and lined 
up for their bows. Anna Flood rose when the audience did, pushing 
her way through to where Pat and Richard stood, animated, eyes 
locked. Both women had been subjected to speculation about which 
one the new and young and single and handsome preacher would 
favor. Anna and Pat were the only single women of a certain age avail -
able. Unless the new preacher liked them much younger, he’d have 
to choose between these two. Two years ago, Anna had won—she was 
213 P ARADISE  
sure of it—hands down. So far. Now she moved toward Richard smil -
ing broadly, hoping to freeze the tongues of anyone who might think 
otherwise seeing him prefer Pat’s company to hers during the Christ -
mas play. They were careful in their courtship, never touching in pub -
lic. When she cooked supper for him they made sure the parsonage 
blazed with light, and he drove or walked her home by seven-thirty 
for all Ruby to see. Still, no date having been set, tongues might 
get restive. More than seemly behavior, however, was on her mind: 
Richard’s eye light. It seemed dulled to her lately. As though he’d lost a 
battle on which his life depended. 
She got to him just before the crowd surged out, pressing toward 
the food tables, chatting, laughing. 
“Hi, Pat. What happened to you, Richard?” 
“Sick as a dog there for a minute,” he said. “Come on. Let’s stand 
outside before it starts up again.” 
They said goodbye and left Pat to decide whether she wanted to 
talk to happy parents, mind the food table or leave. She had decided 
on the last when Carter Seawright stepped on her foot. 
“Oh. Excuse me, Miss Best. I’m sorry.” 
“It’s all right, Carter, but please calm yourself down.” 
“Yes, m’am.” 
“And don’t forget. Right after the holidays, you and I have a make -
up lesson. January sixth, you hear?” 
“I be there, Miss Best.” 
“Is that ‘I’ll’? ‘I’ll be there’?” 
“Yes, m’am, Miss Best. I will.” 
In the kitchen heating water for tea, Pat banged the cupboard door so 
hard the cups rattled. It was a toss-up as to whose behavior had 
annoyed her most, Anna’s or her own. At least she could understand 
Anna: protecting her stake. But why had she defended people and 
things and ideas with a passion she did not feel? The deep weeping 
pleasure the audience took from the play disgusted her. All that non -
sense she had grown up with seemed to her like an excuse to be hate -
ful. Richard was right to ask, why seven and not nine? Pat had seen the 
214 Patricia  
play all her life, although she had never been chosen for any part other 
than the choir. That was when Soane taught school—before she even 
noticed the singularity of the numbers. It was some time later that she 
saw there were only eight. By the time she understood that the Cato 
line was cut, there was another erasure. Who? There were only two 
families who were not part of the original nine but had come to Haven 
early enough to have a kind of associate status: the Jurys (although 
their grandson, Harper, had married a Blackhorse original—good for 
him) and her father’s father: Fulton Best. They didn’t count as origi -
nals, so it had to be—who? Surely not the Floods if Anna married 
Richard Misner. Wouldn’t that count? Could Richard save the Flood 
line? Or was it the Pooles, because of Billie Delia? No. There were 
shiploads of males in that family. It would be proof of Apollo’s or 
Brood’s dalliance, but if that were a deterrent, the Morgans themselves 
had been in grave danger until K.D. married Arnette. And if Arnette 
had a son rather than a daughter, how much safer their position would 
be. The Fleetwoods’ too. Since Jeff and Sweetie had not measured up, 
Arnette was critical to both families. 
The tea was ready, and Pat leaned over it, frowning, and so intent 
on puzzling the problem out that she did not hear Roger enter until he 
stood in the doorframe. 
“You left too early,” he said. “We caroled some.” 
“Yes? Oh. Well.” Pat dredged up a smile. 
“Missed some good cake too.” He yawned. “Took up a good collec -
tion for Lone afterwards. Lord, that’s a crazy woman.” Too tired to 
laugh, Roger shook his head and smiled. “But she was good in her 
day.” He turned to leave, saying, “Well, good night, baby. I have to 
squeal tires early tomorrow.” 
“Daddy.” Pat spoke to his back. 
“Uh huh?” 
“Why do they change it? There used to be nine families in the 
play. Then eight for years and years. Now seven.” 
“What’re you talking about?” 
“You know.” 
“No. I don’t know.” 
“The play. How the holy families get fewer and fewer.” 
215 P ARADISE  
“Kate does all that. And Nathan. Picking the children, I mean. 
Maybe they didn’t have enough for the usual size.” 
“Daddy.” He must have heard the doubt in her tone. 
“What?” If he did, it didn’t show. 
“It was skin color, wasn’t it?” 
“What?” 
“The way people get chosen and ranked in this town.” 
“Aw, no. Well, there might have been a little offense taken—long 
ago. But nothing hard.” 
“No? What about what Steward said when you got married?” 
“Steward? Oh, well, the Morgans are very serious about them -
selves. Too serious sometimes.” 
Pat blew in her cup. 
Roger met her silence and then returned to a less uncomfortable 
topic. 
“I thought the play was pretty nice, myself. We have to do some -
thing about Nathan, though. He ain’t the sharpest knife in the drawer 
anymore.” Then, as an afterthought, “What Reverend Misner have to 
say for himself? Looked awful serious back there.” 
She didn’t look up. “Jus t . . . talk.”  
“Anything happening with you two?” 
“Daddy, please.” 
“No harm in asking, is there?” He paused for an answer, and when 
there was none he left, murmuring something about the furnace. 
Yes there is. Harm. Pat sipped carefully from a spoon. Ask Richard 
Misner. Ask him what I just did to him. Or what everyone else does. 
When he asks questions, they close him out to anything but the obvi -
ous, the superﬁcial. And I of all people know exactly what it feels like. 
Not good enough to be represented by eight-year-olds on a stage. 
Fifteen minutes later Pat stood in the garden, seventy yards from 
Delia’s tombstone. The evening had turned chilly but still not cold 
enough for snow. The lemon mint had shriveled, but lavender and 
sage bushes were full and fragrant. No wind to speak of, so the ﬁre in 
the oil barrel was easily contained. One by one she dropped cardboard 
ﬁles, sheets of paper—both stapled and loose—into the ﬂames. She 
had to tear the covers off the composition notebooks and hold them 
216 Patricia  
slant with a stick so they would not smother the ﬁre. The smoke was 
bitter. She stepped back and gathered clumps of lavender and threw it 
in as well. It took some time, but ﬁnally she turned her back on the 
ashes and walked into her house trailing along the odor of burnt laven -
der. At the kitchen sink she washed her hands and dashed water on her 
face. She felt clean. Perhaps that was why she began to laugh. Lightly 
at ﬁrst and then heavily, her head thrown back as she sat at the table. 
Did they really think they could keep this up? The numbers, the 
bloodlines, the who fucks who? All those generations of 8-rocks kept 
going, just to end up narrow as bale wire? Well, to stay alive maybe 
they could, maybe they should, since nobody dies in Ruby. 
She wiped her eyes and lifted the cup from its saucer. Tea leaves 
clustered in its well. More boiling water, a little steeping, and the black 
leaves would yield more. Even more. Ever more. Until. Well, now. 
What do you know? It was clear as water. The generations had to be 
not only racially untampered with but free of adultery too. “God bless 
the pure and holy” indeed. That was their purity. That was their holi -
ness. That was the deal Zechariah had made during his humming 
prayer. It wasn’t God’s brow to be feared. It was his own, their own. Is 
that why “Be the Furrow of His Brow” drove them crazy? But the 
bargain must have been broken or changed, because there were only 
seven now. By whom? The Morgans, probably. They ran everything, 
controlled everything. What new bargain had the twins struck? Did 
they really believe that no one died in Ruby? Suddenly Pat thought she 
knew all of it. Unadulterated and unadulteried 8-rock blood held its 
magic as long as it resided in Ruby. That was their recipe. That was 
their deal. For Immortality. 
Pat’s smile was crooked. In that case, she thought, everything that 
worries them must come from women. 
“Dear God,” she murmured. “Dear, dear God. I burned the 
papers.” 
217 CONSOLA T A  In the good clean darkness of the cellar, Consolata woke to the 
wrenching disappointment of not having died the night before. Each 
morning, her hopes dashed, she lay on a cot belowground, repelled by 
her sluglike existence, each hour of which she managed to get through 
by sipping from black bottles with handsome names. Each night she 
sank into sleep determined it would be the ﬁnal one, and hoped that a 
great hovering foot would descend and crush her like a garden pest. 
Already in a space tight enough for a cofﬁn, already devoted to the 
dark, long removed from appetites, craving only oblivion, she strug -
gled to understand the delay. “What for?” she asked, and her voice was 
one among many that packed the cellar from rafter to stone ﬂoor. Sev -
eral times a week, at night or in the shadowy part of the day, she rose 
aboveground. Then she would stand outside in the garden, walk 
around, look up at the sky to see the only light it had that she could 
bear. One of the women, Mavis usually, would insist on joining her. 
Talking, talking, always talking. Or a couple of others would come. 
Sipping from the dusty bottles with handsome names—Jarnac, 
Médoc, Haut-Brion and Saint-Émilion—made it possible to listen to 
them, even answer sometimes. Other than Mavis, who had been there 
the longest, it was getting harder and harder to tell one from another. 
What she knew of them she had mostly forgotten, and it seemed less 
and less important to remember any of it, because the timbre of each 
of their voices told the same tale: disorder, deception and, what Sister 
Roberta warned the Indian girls against, drift. The three d’s that paved 
221 P ARADISE  
the road to perdition, and the greatest of these was drift. 
Over the past eight years they had come. The ﬁrst one, Mavis, dur -
ing Mother’s long illness; the second right after she died. Then two 
more. Each one asking permission to linger a few days but never actu -
ally leaving. Now and then one or another packed a scruffy little bag, 
said goodbye and seemed to disappear for a while—but only a while. 
They always came back to stay on, living like mice in a house no one, 
not even the tax collector, wanted, with a woman in love with the 
cemetery. Consolata looked at them through the bronze or gray or 
blue of her various sunglasses and saw broken girls, frightened girls, 
weak and lying. When she was sipping Saint-Émilion or the smoky 
Jarnac, she could tolerate them, but more and more she wanted to 
snap their necks. Anything to stop the badly cooked indigestible 
food, the greedy hammering music, the ﬁghts, the raucous empty 
laughter, the claims. But especially the drift. Sister Roberta would 
have pulped their hands. Not only did they do nothing except the 
absolutely necessary, they had no plans to do anything. Instead of plans 
they had wishes—foolish babygirl wishes. Mavis talked endlessly of 
sureﬁre moneymaking ventures: beehives; something called “bed and 
breakfast”; a catering company; an orphanage. One thought she had 
found a treasure chest of money or jewels or something and wanted 
help to cheat the others of its contents. Another was secretly slicing her 
thighs, her arms. Wishing to be the queen of scars, she made thin red 
slits in her skin with whatever came to hand: razor, safety pin, paring 
knife. One other longed for what sounded like a sort of cabaret life, a 
crowded place where she could sing sorrow-ﬁlled songs with her eyes 
closed. Consolata listened to these babygirl dreams with padded, 
wine-dampened indulgence, for they did not infuriate her as much as 
their whispers of love which lingered long after the women had gone. 
One by one they would ﬂoat down the stairs, carrying a kerosene lamp 
or a candle, like maidens entering a temple or a crypt, to sit on the 
ﬂoor and talk of love as if they knew anything at all about it. They 
spoke of men who came to caress them in their sleep; of men waiting 
for them in the desert or by cool water; of men who once had desper -
ately loved them; or men who should have loved them, might have 
222 Consolata  
loved, would have. 
On her worst days, when the maw of depression soiled the clean 
darkness, she wanted to kill them all. Maybe that was what her slug life 
was being prolonged for. That and the cold serenity of God’s wrath. To 
die without His forgiveness condemned her soul. But to die without 
Mary Magna’s fouled it per omnia saecula saeculorum. She might 
have given it freely if Consolata had told her in time, confessed before 
the old woman’s mind faded to singsong. On that last day, Consolata 
had climbed into the bed behind her and, tossing the pillows on the 
ﬂoor, raised up the feathery body and held it in her arms and between 
her legs. The small white head nestled between Consolata’s breasts, 
and so the lady had entered death like a birthing, rocked and prayed 
for by the woman she had kidnapped as a child. Kidnapped three chil -
dren, actually; the easiest thing in the world in 1925. Mary Magna, a 
sister, not a mother, then, ﬂatly refused to leave two children in the 
street garbage they sat in. She simply picked them up, took them to 
the hospital where she worked and cleaned them in a sequence of 
Ordorno’s Baking Soda, Glover’s Mange, soap, alcohol, Blue Oint -
ment, soap, alcohol and then iodine carefully placed on their sores. 
She dressed them and, with the complicity of the other mission sisters, 
took them with her to the ship. They were six American nuns on their 
way back to the States after twelve years of being upstaged by older, 
sterner Portuguese Orders. Nobody questioned Sisters Devoted to 
Indian and Colored People paying cut-rate passage for three certainly 
not white urchins in their charge. For there were three now, Consolata 
being a last-minute decision because she was already nine years old. 
By anyone’s standard the snatching was a rescue, because whatever 
life the exasperated, headstrong nun was dragging them to, it would 
be superior to what lay before them in the shit-strewn paths of that city. 
When they arrived in Puerto Limón, Sister Mary Magna placed two 
of them in an orphanage, for by then she had fallen in love with 
Consolata. The green eyes? the tea-colored hair? maybe her docility? 
Perhaps her smoky, sundown skin? She took her along as a ward to the 
post to which the difﬁcult nun was now assigned—an asylum/boarding 
school for Indian girls in some desolate part of the North American 
223 West. P ARADISE  
In white letters on a ﬁeld of blue, a sign near the access road read 
christ the king school for native girls. Maybe that was what 
everybody meant to call it, but in Consolata’s living memory only the 
nuns used its proper name—mostly in prayer. Against all reason, the 
students, the state ofﬁcials and those they encountered in town called 
it the Convent. 
For thirty years Consolata worked hard to become and remain 
Mary Magna’s pride, one of her singular accomplishments in a life -
time of teaching, nurturing and tending in places with names the 
nun’s own parents had never heard of and could not repeat until their 
daughter pronounced them. Consolata worshipped her. When she 
was stolen and taken to the hospital, they stuck needles in her arms to 
protect her, they said, from diseases. The violent illness that followed 
she remembered as pleasant, because while she lay in the children’s 
ward a beautiful framed face watched her. It had lake-blue eyes, 
steady, clear but with a hint of panic behind them, a worry that Conso -
lata had never seen. It was worth getting sick, dying, even, to see that 
kind of concern in an adult’s eyes. Every now and then the woman 
with the framed face would reach over and touch Consolata’s forehead 
with the backs of her knuckles or smooth her wet, tangled hair. The 
glass beads hanging from her waist or from her ﬁngers winked. Conso -
lata loved those hands: the ﬂat ﬁngernails, the smooth tough skin of 
the palm. And she loved the unsmiling mouth, which never needed to 
show its teeth to radiate happiness or welcome. Consolata could see a 
cool blue light beaming softly under the habit. It came, she thought, 
from the heart of her. 
Straight from the hospital, Consolata, in a clean brown dress that 
reached her ankles, accompanied the nuns to a ship called Atenas. 
After the Panama call they disembarked in New Orleans and from 
there traveled in an automobile, a train, a bus, another automobile. 
And the magic that started with the hospital needles piled up and up: 
toilets that swirled water clear enough to drink; soft white bread 
already sliced in its wrapper; milk in glass bottles; and all through 
the day every day the gorgeous language made especially for talking 
to heaven. Ora pro nobis gratia plena sanctiﬁcetur nomen tuum 
224 Consolata  
ﬁat volunt as tua, sicut in caelo, et in terra sed libera nos a malo a 
malo a malo. Only when they arrived at the school did the magic slow. 
Although the land had nothing to recommend it, the house was like a 
castle, full of a beauty Mary Magna said had to be eliminated at once. 
Consolata’s ﬁrst tasks were to smash offending marble ﬁgures and tend 
bonﬁres of books, crossing herself when naked lovers blew out of the 
ﬁre and had to be chased back to the ﬂame. Consolata slept in the 
pantry, scrubbed tile, fed chickens, prayed, peeled, gardened, canned 
and laundered. It was she, not any of the others, who discovered the 
wild bush heavy with stinging-hot peppers and who cultivated them. 
She learned rudimentary cooking skills from Sister Roberta and got 
good enough to take over the kitchen as well as the garden. She 
attended classes with the Indian girls but formed no attachments to 
them. 
For thirty years she offered her body and her soul to God’s Son and 
His Mother as completely as if she had taken the veil herself. To her of 
the bleeding heart and bottomless love. To her quae sine tactu pudoris. 
To the beata viscera Mariae Virginis. To her whose way was narrow but 
scented with the sweetness of thyme. To Him whose love was so per -
fectly available it dumbfounded wise men and the damned. He who 
had become human so we could know Him touch Him see Him in the 
littlest ways. Become human so His suffering would mirror ours, that 
His death throes, His doubt, despair, His failure, would speak for and 
absorb throughout earthtime what we were vulnerable to. And those 
thirty years of surrender to the living God cracked like a pullet’s egg 
when she met the living man. 
It was 1954. People were building houses, fencing and plowing 
land, some seventeen miles south of Christ the King. They had begun 
to build a feed store, a grocery store and, to Mary Magna’s delight, 
a pharmacy closer than ninety miles. There she could purchase the 
bolts of antiseptic cotton for the girls’ menstrual periods, the ﬁne nee -
dles, the sixty-weight thread that kept them busy mending, mending, 
the Lydia Pinkham, the StanBack powder, and the aluminum chloride 
with which she made deodorant. 
On one of these trips, when Consolata accompanied Mary Magna 
in the school’s Mercury station wagon, even before they reached the 
225 P ARADISE  
newly cut road it was clear something was happening. Something 
unbridled was going on under the scalding sun. They could hear loud 
cheering, and instead of thirty or so energetic people going quietly 
about the business of making a town, they saw horses galloping off into 
yards, down the road, and people screaming with laughter. Small girls 
with red and purple ﬂowers in their hair were jumping up and down. A 
boy holding for dear life onto a horse’s neck was lifted off and declared 
winner. Young men and boys swung their hats, chased horses and 
wiped their brimming eyes. As Consolata watched that reckless joy, 
she heard a faint but insistent Sha sha sha. Sha sha sha. Then a mem -
ory of just such skin and just such men, dancing with women in the 
streets to music beating like an infuriated heart, torsos still, hips mak -
ing small circles above legs moving so rapidly it was fruitless to deci -
pher how such ease was possible. These men here were not dancing, 
however; they were laughing, running, calling to each other and to 
women doubled over in glee. And although they were living here in a 
hamlet, not in a loud city full of glittering black people, Consolata 
knew she knew them. 
It was some time before Mary Magna could get the pharmacist’s 
attention. Finally he left the crowd and walked them back to his 
house, where a closed-off part of the front porch served as a shop. He 
opened the screen door and, politely inclining his head, ushered Mary 
Magna in. It was while Consolata waited on the steps that she saw him 
for the ﬁrst time. Sha sha sha. Sha sha sha. A lean young man astride 
one horse, leading another. His khaki shirt was soaked with sweat, and 
at some point he removed his wide ﬂat hat to wipe perspiration from 
his forehead. His hips were rocking in the saddle, back and forth, back 
and forth. Sha sha sha. Sha sha sha. Consolata saw his proﬁle, and the 
wing of a feathered thing, undead, ﬂuttered in her stomach. He rode 
on past and disappeared into the feedlot. Mary Magna emerged with 
her purchases, complaining a little about something or other—the 
price, the quality—and hurried to the station wagon, Consolata, 
behind her, carrying blue-tissued rolls of surgical cotton. Just as she 
opened the passenger door he passed again. On foot, running lightly, 
eager to return to the festive knot of people farther down the road. 
Casually, perfunctorily, he looked her way. Consolata looked back and 
226 Consolata  
thought she saw hesitation in his eyes if not in his stride. Quickly she 
ducked into the sun-baked Mercury, where the heat seemed to explain 
her difﬁcult breathing. She did not see him again for two months of 
time made unstable by a feathered thing ﬁghting for wingspread. 
Months of fervent prayer and extra care taken with chores. Months of 
tension also, because the school had been enjoined to close. Although 
the endowment of the wealthy woman who founded and funded the 
order had survived the thirties, it was depleted by the ﬁfties. The good, 
sweet Indian girls were long gone—snatched away by their mothers 
and brothers or graduated into a pious life. For three years now the 
school had been soliciting wards of the state: impudent girls who 
clearly thought the sisters were hilarious most of the time, sinister the 
rest of the time. Two had already run away; only four remained. Unless 
the sisters could persuade the state to send them (and pay for) more 
wicked, wayward Indian girls, the orders were to prepare for closure 
and reassignment. The state had wayward girls, all right, since way -
ward could mean anything from bedwetting to truancy to stuttering in 
class, but preferred to place them in Protestant schools, where they 
could understand the clothes if not the religious behavior of the teach -
ers. Catholic churches and schools in Oklahoma were as rare as ﬁsh 
pockets. Which was why the benefactress had bought the mansion in 
the ﬁrst place. It was an opportunity to intervene at the heart of the 
problem: to bring God and language to natives who were assumed to 
have neither; to alter their diets, their clothes, their minds; to help 
them despise everything that had once made their lives worthwhile 
and to offer them instead the privilege of knowing the one and only 
God and a chance, thereby, for redemption. Mary Magna wrote letter 
after letter, traveled to Oklahoma City and beyond, hoping to save the 
school. In that distracted atmosphere, Consolata’s fumbling, dropping 
some things, scorching others, making rushed, unscheduled visits to 
the chapel, were nuisances to the sisters but not signs of alarm distin -
guishable from their own. When asked what the matter was or repri -
manded for some intolerable lapse, she invented excuses or sulked. 
Looming in her confusion, daily refreshing her hasty piety, was the 
fear of being asked to step outside the Convent, to shop in the town 
again. So she did the yard chores at ﬁrst light and spent the balance of 
227 P ARADISE  
the day inside, mismanaging her work. None of which helped in the 
end. He came to her. 
On a clear summer day, as she knelt weeding in the garden along 
with two sullen wards of the state, a male voice behind her said: 
“Excuse me, miss.” 
All he wanted was some black peppers. 
He was twenty-nine. She was thirty-nine. And she lost her mind. 
Completely. 
Consolata was not a virgin. One of the reasons she so gratefully 
accepted Mary Magna’s hand, stretching over the litter like a dove’s 
wing, was the dirty pokings her ninth year subjected her to. But never, 
after the white hand had enclosed her ﬁlthy paw, did she know any 
male or want to, which must have been why being love-struck after 
thirty celibate years took on an edible quality. 
What did he say? Come with me? What they call you? How much 
for half a peck? Or did he just show up the next day for more of the hot 
black peppers? Did she walk toward him to get a better look? Or did he 
move toward her? In any case, with something like amazement, he’d 
said, “Your eyes are like mint leaves.” Had she answered “And yours 
are like the beginning of the world” aloud, or were these words con -
ﬁned to her head? Did she really drop to her knees and encircle his 
leg, or was that merely what she was wanting to do? 
“I’ll return your basket. But it may be late when I do. Is it all right 
if I disturb you?” 
She didn’t remember saying anything to that, but her face surely 
told him what he needed to know, because he was there in the night 
and she was there too and he took her hand in his. Not a peck basket in 
sight. Sha sha sha. 
Once in his truck, easing down the graveled driveway, the narrow 
dirt road, and then gaining speed on a wider tarmac one, they did not 
speak. He drove, it seemed, for the pleasure of the machine: the roar 
contained, hooded in steel; the sly way it simultaneously parted the 
near darkness and vaulted into darkness afar—beyond what could be 
anticipated. They drove for what Consolata believed were hours, no 
words passing between them. The danger and its necessity focused 
them, made them calm. She did not know or care where headed or 
228 Consolata  
what might happen when they arrived. Speeding toward the unfore -
seeable, sitting next to him who was darker than the darkness they 
split, Consolata let the feathers unfold and come unstuck from the 
walls of a stone-cold womb. Out here where wind was not a help or 
threat to sunﬂowers, nor the moon a language of time, of weather, of 
sowing or harvesting, but a feature of the original world designed for 
the two of them. 
Finally he slowed and turned into a barely passable track, where 
coyote grass scraped the fenders. In the middle of it he braked and 
would have taken her in his arms except she was already there. 
On the way back they were speechless again. What had been 
uttered during their lovemaking leaned toward language, gestured its 
afﬁliation, but in fact was un-memorable, -controllable or -translat -
able. Before dawn they pulled away from each other as though, having 
been arrested, they were each facing prison sentences without parole. 
As she opened the door and stepped down, he said, “Friday. Noon.” 
Consolata stood there while he backed the truck away. She had not 
seen him clearly even once during the whole night. But Friday. Noon. 
They would do it do it do it in daylight. She hugged herself, sank to her 
knees and doubled over. Her forehead actually tapping the ground as 
she rocked in a harness of pleasure. 
She slipped into the kitchen and pretended to Sister Roberta that 
she had been in the henhouse. 
“Well, then? Where are the eggs?” 
“Oh. I forgot the basket.” 
“Don’t go softheaded on me, please.” 
“No, Sister. I won’t.” 
“Everything is in such disarray.” 
“Yes, Sister.” 
“Well, move, then.” 
“Yes, Sister. Excuse me, Sister.” 
“Is something funny?” 
“No, Sister. Nothing. Bu t... ” 
“But?” 
“I . . . W hat is today?” 
“Saint Martha.” 
229 P ARADISE  
“I mean what day of the week.”  
“Tuesday. Why?”  
“Nothing, Sister.”  
“We need your wits, dear. Not your confusion.”  
“Yes, Sister.”  
Consolata snatched a basket and ran out the kitchen door.  
Friday. Noon. The sun has hammered everybody back behind stone 
walls for relief. Everybody but Consolata and, she hopes, the living 
man. She has no choice but to bear the heat with only a straw hat to 
protect her from the anvil the sun takes her for. She is standing at the 
slight turn in the driveway, but in full view of the house. This land is 
ﬂat as a hoof, open as a baby’s mouth. There is nowhere to hide outra -
geousness. If Sister Roberta or Mary Magna calls to her or asks for an 
explanation she will invent something—or nothing. She hears his 
truck before she sees it and when it arrives it passes her by. He does not 
turn his head, but he signals. His ﬁnger lifts from the steering wheel 
and points farther ahead. Consolata turns right and follows the sound 
of his tires and then their silence as they touch tarmac. He waits for her 
on the shoulder of the road. 
Inside the truck they look at one another for a long time, seriously, 
carefully, and then they smile. 
He drives to a burned-out farmhouse that sits on a rise of fallow 
land. Negotiating bluestem and chickweed, he parks behind the black 
teeth of a broken chimney. Hand in hand, they ﬁght shrub and bram -
ble until they reach a shallow gully. Consolata spots at once what he 
wants her to see: two ﬁg trees growing into each other. When they are 
able to speak full sentences, he gazes at her, saying: 
“Don’t ask me to explain. I can’t.”  
“Nothing to explain.”  
“I’m trying to get on in my life. A lot of people depend on me.”  
“I know you’re married.”  
“I aim to stay so.”  
“I know.”  
“What else you know?” He puts his foreﬁnger in her navel.  
230 Consolata  
“That I’m way older than you.” 
He looks up, away from her navel to her eyes, and smiles. “No-
body’s older than me.” 
Consolata laughs. 
“Certainly not you,” he says. “When’s the last time?” 
“Before you were born.” 
“Then you’re all mine.” 
“Oh, yes.” 
He kisses her lightly, then leans on his elbow. “I’ve traveled. All 
over. I’ve never seen anything like you. How could anything be put 
together like you? Do you know how beautiful you are? Have you 
looked at yourself?” 
“I’m looking now.” 
No ﬁgs ever appeared on those trees during all the time they met there, 
but they were grateful for the shade of dusty leaves and the protection 
of the agonized trunks. The blankets he brought they lay on as much 
as possible. Later each saw the nicks and bruises the dry creek caused. 
Consolata was questioned. She refused to answer; diverted the 
inquiries into lament. “What’s going to happen to me when all this is 
closed? Nobody has said what’s going to happen to me.” 
“Don’t be ridiculous. You know we’ll take care of you. Always.” 
Consolata pouted, pretending to be wild with worry and therefore 
unreliable. The more assurance she got, the more she insisted upon 
wandering off, to “be by myself,” she said. An urge that struck her 
mostly on Fridays. Around noon. 
When Mary Magna and Sister Roberta left on business in Sep -
tember, Sister Mary Elizabeth and three, now, feckless students 
continued to pack, clean, study and maintain prayer. Two of the 
students, Clarissa and Penny, began to grin when they saw Consolata. 
They were fourteen years old; small-boned girls with beautiful know -
ing eyes that could go suddenly blank. They lived to get out of that 
place, and were in fairly good spirits now that the end was coming. 
Recently they had begun to regard Consolata as a confederate rather 
than one of the enemy out to ruin their lives. And whispering to each 
231 P ARADISE  
other in a language the sisters had forbidden them to use, they covered 
for her, did the egg gathering that was Consolata’s responsibility. The 
weeding and washing up too. Sometimes they watched from the 
schoolroom windows, heads touching, eyes aglow, as the woman they 
believed old enough to be their grandmother stood in all weather wait -
ing for the Chevrolet truck. 
“Does anyone know?” Consolata runs her thumbnail around the 
living man’s nipple. 
“Wouldn’t be surprised,” he answers. 
“Your wife?” 
“No.” 
“You told somebody?” 
“No.” 
“Someone saw us?” 
“Don’t think so.” 
“Then how could anybody know?” 
“I have a twin.” 
Consolata sits up. “There are two of you?” 
“No.” He closes his eyes. When he opens them he is looking away. 
“There’s just one of me.” 
September marched through smearing everything with oil paint: acres 
of cardamom yellow, burnt orange, miles of sienna, blue ravines both 
cerulean and midnight, along with heartbreakingly violet skies. When 
October arrived and gourds were swelling in the places where radishes 
had been, Mary Magna and Sister Roberta returned, severely irritated 
by priests, lawyers, clerks and clerics. Their news was no news at all. 
Everyone’s fate was being resolved in Saint Pere, except her own. That 
decision would come later. Mary Magna’s age, seventy-two, was a con -
sideration, but she refused placement in a quiet home. Also there was 
the upkeep of the property. The title was in the hands of the benefac -
tress’ foundation (which was down to its principal now), so the house 
and land were not exactly church owned; the argument, therefore, was 
whether it was subject to current and back taxes. But the real question 
for the assessor was why in a Protestant state a bevy of strange Catholic 
232 Consolata  
women with no male mission to control them was entitled to special 
treatment. Fortunately or unfortunately, no natural resources had so 
far been discovered on the land, making it impossible for the founda -
tion to unburden it. They could not simply walk off, could they? Mary 
Magna called everyone together to explain. Another girl had run away, 
but the last two, Penny and Clarissa, listened in rapt attention as their 
future—the next four years of it anyway—which had taken shape in 
some old man in a suit’s hands, was presented to them. They bowed 
their beautiful heads in solemn acquiescence, certain that the help 
they needed to get out of the clutch of nuns was on the way. 
Consolata, however, paid scant attention to Mary Magna’s words. 
She wasn’t going anywhere. She would live in the ﬁeld if she had to, 
or, better, in the ﬁre-ruined house that had become her mind’s home. 
Three times now she had followed him through it, balancing on buck -
led ﬂoorboards and smelling twelve-year-old smoke. Out there with 
not even a tree line in view, like a house built on the sand waves of the 
lonely Sahara, with no one or thing to hinder it, the house had burned 
freely in the play of wind and its own preen. Had it begun at night, 
with children asleep? Or was it unoccupied when the ﬂames ﬁrst 
seethed? Was the husband sixty acres away, bundling, branding, clear -
ing, sowing? The wife stooped over a washtub in the yard, wisps of hair 
irritating her forehead? She would have thrown a bucket or two, then, 
yelling to the children, rushed to collect what she could. Piling every -
thing she could reach, snatch, into the yard. Surely they had a bell, a 
rusty triangle—something to ring or bang to warn the other of advanc -
ing danger. When the husband got there, the smoke would have 
forced him to cry. But only the smoke, for they were not crying people. 
He would have worried ﬁrst about the stock and guided them to safety 
or set them free, remembering that he had no property insurance. 
Other than what lay in the yard, all was lost. Even the sunﬂowers at the 
northwest corner of the house, near the kitchen, where the wife could 
see them while stirring hominy. 
Consolata ferreted in drawers where ﬁeld mice had nibbled 
propane gas receipts. Saw how the wind had smoothed charred furni -
ture to silk. Nether shapes had taken over the space from which 
humans had ﬂed. A kind of statuary of ash people. A man, eight feet 
233 P ARADISE  
tall, hovered near the ﬁreplace. His legs, sturdy cowboy legs, and the 
set of his jaw as he faced them answered immediate questions of 
domain. The ﬁnger at the tip of his long black arm pointed left 
toward sky where a wall had crumbled, demanding quick exit from his 
premises. Near the pointing man, faintly etched on the ocher wall, was 
a girl with butterﬂy wings three feet long. The opposite wall was inhab -
ited by what Consolata thought were ﬁshmen, but the living man said, 
No, more like Eskimo eyes. 
“Eskimo?” she asked, bunching her hair away from her neck. 
“What’s an Eskimo?” 
He laughed and, obeying the cowboy’s order, pulled her away, 
over the rubble of the collapsed wall, back to the gully, where they 
competed with the ﬁg trees for holding on to one another. 
Mid-October he skipped a week. A Friday came and Consolata waited 
for two and a half hours where the dirt road met the tarmac. She would 
have waited longer, but Penny and Clarissa came and led her away. 
He must be dead, she thought, and no one to tell her so. All night 
she fretted—on her pallet in the pantry or hunched in darkness at the 
kitchen table. Morning found her watching the world of living things 
dribbling away with his absence. Her heart, clogged with awfulness, 
weakened. Her veins seemed to have turned into crinkly cellophane 
tubes. The heaviness in her chest was gaining weight so fast she was 
unable to breathe properly. Finally she decided to ﬁnd out or ﬁnd him. 
Saturday was a busy day in those parts. The once-a-week bus 
honked her out of the way as she strode down the middle of the county 
road. Consolata skittered to the shoulder and kept on, her unbraided 
hair lifting in the breeze of the tailpipe. A few minutes later an oil 
truck passed her, its driver yelling something through the window. 
Half an hour later there was a glistening in the distance. A car? A 
truck? Him? Her heart gurgled and began to seep blood back into her 
cellophane veins. She dared not let the smile growing in her mouth 
spread to her face. Nor did she dare stop walking while the vehicle 
came slowly into view. Yes, dear God, a truck. And one person at the 
wheel, my Jesus. And now it slowed. Consolata turned to watch it 
234 Consolata  
come full stop and to feast on the living man’s face. 
He leaned out of the window, smiling. 
“Want a lift?” 
Consolata ran across the road and darted around to the passenger 
door. By the time she got there it was open. She climbed in, and for 
some reason—a feminine desire to scold or annihilate twenty-four 
hours of desperation; to pretend, at least, that the suffering he had 
caused her required an apology, an explanation to win her forgive-
ness—some instinct like that preserved her and she did not let her 
hand slip into his crotch as it wanted to. 
He was silent, of course. But it was not the silence of the Friday 
noon pickups. Then the unspeaking was lush with promise. Easy. 
Vocal. This silence was barren, a muteness lined with acid. And then 
she noticed the smell. Not unpleasant, not at all, but not his. Conso -
lata froze; then, not daring to look at his face, she glanced sideways at 
his feet. He was wearing not the black high-tops but cowboy boots, 
convincing her that a stranger sat behind the steering wheel, inhabit -
ing the body of him, but not him. 
She thought to scream, to throw herself out onto the road. She 
would ﬁght him if he touched her. She had no time to imagine other 
options, because they were approaching the dirt road that led to the 
Convent. She was just about to ﬂing open the door, when the stranger 
braked and slowed to a standstill. He leaned over, brushing her breasts 
with his arm, and lifted the door handle. She stepped down quickly 
and turned to see. 
He touched the brim of his Stetson, smiling. “Anytime,” he said. 
“Anytime at all.” 
She backed away, staring at the exact face of him, repelled by but 
locked into his eyes, chaste and wide with hatred. 
The incident does not halt the ﬁg tree meetings. He comes the next 
Friday wearing the right shoes and exuding the right smell, and they 
argue a little. 
“What did he do?” 
“Nothing. He didn’t even ask me where I was going. Just drove 
235 me back.” P ARADISE  
“Good thing he did.” 
“Why?” 
“Did us both a favor.” 
“No, he didn’t. He wa s... ” 
“What?” 
“I don’t know.” 
“What’d he say to you?” 
“He said, ‘Want a lift?’ and then he said, ‘Anytime.’ Like he’d do it 
again. I could tell he doesn’t like me.” 
“Probably not. Why should he? You want him to? Like you?” 
“No. Oh, no, but.” 
“But what?” 
Consolata sits up straight and looks steadily toward the back of the 
ﬁre-ruined house. Something brown and furry scurries into what is left 
of a charred rain barrel. 
“You talk to him about me?” she asks. 
“Never told him a thing about you.” 
“Then how did he know I was coming to ﬁnd you?” 
“Maybe he didn’t. Maybe he just didn’t think you should be walk -
ing to town like that.” 
“He didn’t turn the truck around. He was driving north. That’s 
why I thought it was you.” 
“Look,” he says. He squats on his haunches, tossing pebbles. “We 
have to have a signal. I can’t always show up on Fridays. Let’s think of 
something, so you’ll know.” 
They thought of nothing that would work. In the end she told him 
she would wait the Fridays, but only for an hour. He said, If I’m not on 
time, I’m not coming at all. 
The regularity of their meetings, before his twin showed up, had 
smoothed her hunger to a blunt blade. Now irregularity knifed it. 
Even so, twice more he carried her off to the place where ﬁg trees 
insisted on life. She did not know it then, but the second time was 
the last. 
It is the end of October. He walls a portion of the ﬁre-ruined house 
with a horse blanket, and they lie on an army-issue bedroll. The pale 
236 Consolata  
sky above them is ringed with a darkness coming, which they could 
not have seen had they looked. So the falling snow that lights her hair 
and cools his wet back surprises them. Later they speak of their situa -
tion. Blocked by weather and circumstance, they talk, mostly, about 
Where. He mentions a town ninety miles north but corrects himself 
quickly, because no motel or hotel would take them. She suggests the 
Convent because of the hiding places in it everywhere. He snorts his 
displeasure. 
“Listen,” she whispers. “There is a small room in the cellar. No. 
Wait, just listen. I will ﬁx it, make it beautiful. With candles. It’s cool 
and dark in the summer, warm as coffee in winter. We’ll have a lamp 
to see each other with, but nobody can see us. We can shout as loud as 
we want and nobody can hear. Pears are down there and walls of wine. 
The bottles sleep on their sides, and each one has a name, like Veuve 
Clicquot or Médoc, and a number: 1-9-1-5 or 1-9-2-6, like prisoners 
waiting to be freed. Do it,” she urges him. “Please do it. Come to my 
house.” 
While he considers, her mind races ahead with plans. Plans to 
cram rosemary into the pillow slips; rinse linen sheets in hot water 
steeped in cinnamon. They will slake their thirst with the prisoner 
wine, she tells him. He laughs a low, satisﬁed laugh and she bites his 
lip which, in retrospect, was her big mistake. 
Consolata did all of it and more. The cellar room sparkled in the 
light of an eight-holder candelabra from Holland and reeked of 
ancient herbs. Seckel pears crowded a white bowl. None of which 
pleased him for he never arrived. Never felt the slide of old linen on 
his skin, or picked ﬂakes of stick cinnamon from her hair. The two 
wineglasses she rescued from straw-ﬁlled crates and polished to abnor -
mal clarity collected dust particles, then, by November, just before 
Thanksgiving, an industrious spider moved in. 
Penny and Clarissa had washed their hair and sat by the stove, 
ﬁnger-combing it dry. Every now and then one of them would lean 
and shake a shiny black panel of it closer to the heat. Softly singing 
forbidden Algonquian lullabies, they watched Consolata just as they 
always did: her days of excitement, of manic energy; her slow change 
to nail-biting distraction. They liked her because she was stolen, as 
237 P ARADISE  
they had been, and felt sorry for her too. They regarded her behavior as 
serious instruction about the limits and possibilities of love and impris -
onment, and took the lesson with them for the balance of their lives. 
Now, however, their instant future claimed priority. Bags packed, 
plans set, they needed only money. 
“Where do you keep the money, Consolata? Please, Consolata. 
Wednesday they take us to the Correctional. Just a little, Consolata. In 
the pantry, yes? Well, where? There was one dollar and twenty cents 
from Monday alone.” 
Consolata ignored them. “Stop pestering me.” 
“We helped you, Consolata. Now you must help us. It’s not 
stealing—we worked hard here. Please? Think how hard we worked.” 
Their voices chanting, soothing, they swayed their hair and looked 
at her with the glorious eyes of maidens in peril. 
The knock on the kitchen door was not loud, but its conﬁdence 
was unmistakable. Three taps. No more. The girls stilled their hair in 
their hands. Consolata rose from her chair as if summoned by the 
sheriff or an angel. In a way it was both, in the shape of a young 
woman, exhausted, breathing hard but ramrod straight. 
“That’s some walk,” she said. “Please. Let me sit.”  
Penny and Clarissa disappeared like smoke.  
The young woman took the chair Penny had vacated.  
“Can I get you something?” asked Consolata.  
“Water, would you?”  
“Not tea? You look froze.”  
“Yes. But water ﬁrst. Then some tea.”  
Consolat a poured water from a pitcher and bent to check the  stove ﬁre. 
“What’s that smell?” asked the visitor. “Sage?” 
Consolata nodded. The woman covered her lips with her ﬁngers. 
“Does it bother you?” 
“It’ll pass. Thank you.” She drank the water slowly until the glass 
was empty. 
Consolata knew, or thought she did, but asked anyway. “What is it 
you want?” 
“Your help.” Her voice was soft, noncommittal. No judgment, no 
238 pleading. Consolata  
“I can’t help you.” 
“You can if you want to.” 
“What kind of help are you looking for?” 
“I can’t have this child.” 
Hot water splashed from the spout to the saucer. Consolata put 
down the kettle and sopped the water with a towel. She had never seen 
the woman—girl really, not out of her twenties—but there was no 
confusion from the moment she stepped inside about who she was. 
His scent was all over her, or hers was all over him. They had lived 
together close enough long enough to breathe phlox and Camay soap 
and tobacco and to exhale it in their wake. That and some other thing: 
the scent of small children, the lovely aroma of sweet oil, baby powder 
and a meatless diet. This was a mother here, saying a brute unmotherly 
thing that rushed at Consolata like a forked tongue. She dodged the 
tongue, but the toxin behind it shocked her with what she had known 
but never imagined: she was sharing him with his wife. Now she saw 
the pictures that represented exactly what that word—sharing— 
meant. 
“I can’t help you with that! What’s wrong with you?” 
“I’ve had two children in two years. If I have anothe r... ” 
“Why come to me? Why you asking me?” 
“Who else?” asked the woman, in her clear, matter-of-fact voice. 
The poison spread. Consolata had lost him. Completely. Forever. 
His wife might not know it, but Consolata remembered his face. Not 
when she bit his lip, but when she had hummed over the blood she 
licked from it. He’d sucked air sharply. Said, “Don’t ever do that 
again.” But his eyes, ﬁrst startled, then revolted, had said the rest of 
what she should have known right away. Clover, cinnamon, soft old 
linen—who would chance pears and a wall of prisoner wine with a 
woman bent on eating him like a meal? 
“You get on out of here. You didn’t come here for that. You came 
to tell me, show me, what you’re like. And you think I’ll stop when I 
know what you’re willing to do. Well, I won’t.” 
“No, but he will.” 
“You wouldn’t have come here if you thought so. You want to see 
239 what I’m like; if I’m pregnant too.” P ARADISE  
“Listen to me. He can’t fail at what he is doing. None of us can. 
We are making something.” 
“What do I care about your raggedy little town? Get out. Go on. 
I have work to do.” 
Did she walk all the way home? Or was that a lie too? Was her car 
parked somewhere near? Or if she did walk, did nobody pick her up? Is 
that why she lost the baby? 
Her name was Soane, and when she and Consolata became fast 
friends, Soane told her she didn’t think so. It was the evil in her heart 
that caused it. Arrogance dripping with self-righteousness, she said. 
Pretending a sacriﬁce she had no intention of making taught her not 
to fool with God’s ways. The life she offered as a bargain fell between 
her legs in a swamp of red ﬂuids and windblown sheets. Their friend -
ship was some time coming. In the meanwhile, after the woman left, 
Consolata threw a cloth bag of coins at Penny and Clarissa, shouting, 
“Get out of my face!” 
While the light changed and the meals did too, the next few days 
were one long siege of sorrow, during which Consolata picked 
through the scraps of her gobble-gobble love. Romance stretched to 
the breaking point broke, exposing a simple mindless transfer. From 
Christ, to whom one gave total surrender and then swallowed the idea 
of His ﬂesh, to a living man. Shame. Shame without blame. Consolata 
virtually crawled back to the little chapel (wishing fervently that He 
could be there, glowing red in the dim light). Scuttled back, as women 
do, as into arms understanding where the body, like a muscle spasm, 
has no memory of its cringe. No beseeching prayer emerged. No 
Domine, non sum dignus. She simply bent the knees she had been so 
happy to open and said, “Dear Lord, I didn’t want to eat him. I just 
wanted to go home.” 
Mary Magna came into the chapel and, kneeling with her, put an 
arm around Consolata’s shoulder, saying, “At last.” 
“You don’t know,” said Consolata. 
“I don’t need to, child.” 
“But he, but he.” Sha sha sha. Sha sha sha, she wanted to say, 
240 meaning, he and I are the same. Consolata  
“Sh sh sh. Sh sh sh,” said Mary Magna. “Never speak of him 
again.” 
She might not have agreed so quickly, but as Mary Magna led her 
out of the chapel into the schoolroom, a sunshot seared her right eye, 
announcing the beginning of her bat vision, and she began to see best 
in the dark. Consolata had been spoken to. 
Mary Magna spent money she could not afford to take the house -
hold on a trip to Middleton, where each of them, but especially 
Consolata, confessed and attended mass. Clarissa and Penny, models 
of penitence, urged without success a visit to the Indian and Western 
Museum advertised on the road. Sister Mary Elizabeth said it was an 
unwise way to spend post-confessional time. The long ride back was 
silent except for the shish of missal pages turning and occasional hum -
ming from the last of the school’s clientele. 
Soon only Mother and Sister Roberta were left. Sister Mary Eliza -
beth accepted a teaching post in Indiana. Penny and Clarissa had been 
taken east and, as was later learned, escaped from the bus one night 
in Fayetteville, Arkansas. Except for a money order, made out to 
Consolata and signed with a storybook name, they were never heard 
from again. 
The three women spent the winter waiting, then not waiting, for 
some alternative to retirement or a “home.” The independence the 
mission was designed for was beginning to feel like abandonment. 
Meanwhile they took steps to keep up the property and not incur debt 
the foundation could not meet. Sargeant Person agreed to lease land 
from them for rough corn and alfalfa. They made sauces and jellies 
and European bread. Sold eggs, peppers, hot relish and angry barbe -
cue sauce, which they advertised on a square of cardboard covering 
the faded blue and white name of the school. Most of their customers 
in 1955 drove trucks between Arkansas and Texas. Ruby citizens 
seldom stopped to buy anything other than peppers, since they were 
supreme cooks themselves and made or grew what they wanted. Only 
in the sixties, when times were fat, did they join the truckers and look 
upon what they called Convent-bred chickens as superior enough 
241 P ARADISE  
to their own to be worth a journey. Then they would also try a lit -
tle jalapeño jelly, or a corn relish. Pecan saplings planted in the 
forties were strong in 1960. The Convent sold the nuts, and when pies 
from the harvest were made, they went as soon as posted. They made 
rhubarb pie so delicious it made customers babble, and the barbecue 
sauce got a heavenly reputation based on the hellﬁre peppers. 
It was an all-right life for Consolata. Better than all right, for Mary 
Magna had taught her patience as the ﬁrst order of business. After 
arranging for her conﬁrmation, she had taken the young Consolata 
aside and together they would watch coffee brew or sit in silence at the 
edge of the garden. God’s generosity, she said, is nowhere better seen 
than in the gift of patience. The lesson held Consolata in good stead, 
and she hardly noticed the things she was losing. The ﬁrst to go were 
the rudiments of her ﬁrst language. Every now and then she found her -
self speaking and thinking in that in-between place, the valley between 
the regulations of the ﬁrst language and the vocabulary of the second. 
The next thing to disappear was embarrassment. Finally she lost the 
ability to bear light. By the time Mavis arrived, Sister Roberta had gone 
into a nursing home and Consolata had nothing on her mind but the 
care of Mary Magna. 
But before that, before the disheveled woman in thong slippers 
hollered at the edge of the garden, before Mary Magna’s illness, still in 
a state of devotion and light-blindness, and ten years after that summer 
of hiding in a gully behind a house full of inhospitable ash people, 
Consolata was tricked into raising the dead. 
They were subdued years. Penance attended to but not all-
consuming. There was time and mind for everyday things. Consolata 
learned to manage any and every thing that did not require paper: she 
perfected the barbecue sauce that drove cattle-country people wild; 
quarreled with the chickens; gave hateful geese a wide berth; and 
tended the garden. She and Sister Roberta had agreed to try again for a 
cow and Consolata was standing in the garden, wondering where to 
pen it, when sweat began to pour from her neck, her hairline, like rain. 
So much it clouded the sunglasses she now wore. She removed the 
glasses to wipe the sweat from her eyes. Through that salty water she 
242 Consolata  
saw a shadow moving toward her. When it got close it turned into a 
small woman. Consolata, overcome with dizziness, tried to hold on to 
a bean pole, failed and sank to the ground. When she woke, she was 
sitting in the red chair, the small woman humming while mopping 
her forehead. 
“Talk about luck,” she said, and smiled around a wad of chew -
ing gum. 
“What’s happening to me?” Consolata looked toward the house. 
“Change, I expect. Here’s your glasses. Bent, though.” 
Her name was Lone DuPres, she said, and if she had not come for 
a few peppers, she said, who knew how long Consolata would have 
lain in the snap beans. 
Consolata found herself too weak to stand, so she let her head fall 
back on the chair’s crown and asked for water. 
“Uh uh,” said Lone. “You already got too much of that. How old 
are you?” 
“Forty-nine. Fifty soon.” 
“Well, I’m over seventy and I know my stuff. You do as I say, your 
change will be easier and shorter.” 
“You don’t know that’s what this is.” 
“Bet on it. And it’s not just the sweat. You feel something more, 
don’t you?” 
“Like what?” 
“You’d know it if you had it.” 
“What’s it feel like?” 
“You tell me. Some women can’t stomach it. Others say it reminds 
them of, well, you know.” 
“My throat is parched,” said Consolata. 
Lone dug around in her bag. “I’ll brew you something to help.” 
“No. The sisters. I mean, they won’t like. Won’t let you just walk 
on in and start messing on the stove.” 
“Oh, they’ll be ﬁne.” 
And they were. Lone gave Consolata a hot drink that tasted of 
pure salt. When she described her spell and Lone’s remedy to Mary 
Magna she laughed, saying, “Well, the teacher I am thinks ‘baloney.’ 
243 P ARADISE  
The woman I am thinks anything that helps, helps. But be very care -
ful.” Mary Magna lowered her voice. “I think she practices.” 
Lone didn’t visit often, but when she did she gave Consolata infor -
mation that made her uneasy. Consolata complained that she did not 
believe in magic; that the church and everything holy forbade its 
claims to knowingness and its practice. Lone wasn’t aggressive. She 
simply said, “Sometimes folks need more.” 
“Never,” said Consolata. “In my faith, faith is all I need.” 
“You need what we all need: earth, air, water. Don’t separate God 
from His elements. He created it all. You stuck on dividing Him from 
His works. Don’t unbalance His world.” 
Consolata listened halfheartedly. Her curiosity was mild; her reli -
gious habits entrenched. Her safety did not lie in the fall of a broom 
or the droppings of a coyote. Her happiness was not increased or 
decreased by the sight of a malformed animal. She fancied no con -
versation with water. Nor did she believe that ordinary folk could or 
should interfere with natural consequences. The road from Demby, 
however, was straight as a saw, and a teenager driving it for the ﬁrst 
time believed not only that he could drive it blindfolded but that he 
could drive it in his sleep, which is what Scout Morgan was doing, off 
and on, as he traveled early one evening the road that passed the Con -
vent. He was ﬁfteen years old, driving his best friend’s father’s truck 
(which was nothing compared to the Little Deere his uncle taught 
him to handle), while his brother, Easter, slept in the truck bed and 
the best friend slept at his side. They had sneaked off to Red Fork to 
see the Black Rodeo all their fathers forbade them to attend and had 
drunk themselves happy with Falstaff beer. During one of Scout’s 
involuntary naps at the wheel, the truck careened off the road and 
probably would have done no serious damage but for the roadside 
poles stacked and ready to go as soon as the power crew was empow -
ered to install them. The truck hit the poles and ﬂipped. July Person 
and Easter were thrown out. Scout was stuck inside, crooked red lines 
highlighting the black skin of his temple. 
Lone, sitting at Consolata’s table, sensed rather than heard the 
accident: the shouts of July and Easter could not have traveled that far. 
244 She rose and grabbed Consolata’s arm. Consolata  
“Come on!” 
“Where to?” 
“Close by, I think.” 
When they arrived, Easter and July had pulled Scout from the cab 
and were howling over his dead body. Lone turned to Consolata, say -
ing, “I’m too old now. Can’t do it anymore, but you can.” 
“Lift him?” 
“No. Go inside him. Wake him up.” 
“Inside? How?” 
“Step in. Just step on in. Help him, girl!” 
Consolata looked at the body and without hesitation removed her 
glasses and focused on the trickles of red discoloring his hair. She 
stepped in. Saw the stretch of road he had dreamed through, felt the 
ﬂip of the truck, the headache, the chest pressure, the unwillingness to 
breathe. As from a distance she heard Easter and July kicking the truck 
and moaning. Inside the boy she saw a pinpoint of light receding. 
Pulling up energy that felt like fear, she stared at it until it widened. 
Then more, more, so air could come seeping, at ﬁrst, then rushing 
rushing in. Although it hurt like the devil to look at it, she concen -
trated as though the lungs in need were her own. 
Scout opened his eyes, groaned and sat up. The women told the 
unhurt boys to carry him back to the Convent. They hesitated, 
exchanging looks. Lone shouted, “What the hell is the matter with 
you all?” 
Both were profoundly relieved by Scout’s recovery, but, No, 
m’am, Miss DuPres, they said, we got to get on home. “Let’s see if it 
still runs,” said Easter. They righted the truck and found it sound 
enough to drive. Lone went with them, leaving Consolata half exhila -
rated by and half ashamed of what she had done. Practiced. 
Weeks passed before Lone returned to put her mind at ease about 
the boy’s recovery. 
“You gifted. I knew it from the start.” 
Consolata turned her lips down and crossed herself, whispering, 
“Ave Maria, gratia plena.” The exhilaration was gone now, and the 
245 P ARADISE  
thing seemed nasty to her. Like devilment. Like evil craft. Something 
it would mortify her to tell Mary Magna, Jesus or the Virgin. She 
hadn’t known what she was doing; she was under a spell. Lone’s spell. 
And told her so. 
“Don’t be a fool. God don’t make mistakes. Despising His gift, 
now, that is a mistake. You calling Him a fool, like you?” 
“I don’t understand anything you’re saying,” Consolata told her. 
“Yes you do. Let your mind grow long and use what God gives 
you.” 
“I think He wants me to ignore you.” 
“Hardhead,” said Lone. She hoisted her bag and walked down the 
driveway to wait in the sun for her ride. 
Then Soane came, saying, “Lone DuPres told me what you did. I 
came to thank you with all my heart.” 
She looked much the same to Consolata, except that the long hair 
of 1954, sticky with distress, was cut now. She carried a basket and 
placed it on the table. “You will be in my prayers forever.” 
Consolata lifted the napkin. Round sugar cookies were layered 
between waxed paper. “Mother will like these with her tea,” she said. 
Then, looking at Soane, “Go nice with coffee too.” 
“I’d love a cup. More than anything.” 
Consolata placed the sugar cookies on a platter. “Lone thinks—” 
“I don’t care about that. You gave him back to me.” 
A gander screamed in the yard, scattering the geese before him. 
“I didn’t know he belonged to you.” 
“I know you didn’t.” 
“And it was something I couldn’t help doing. I mean it was out of 
my hands, so to speak.” 
“I know that too.” 
“What does he think?” 
“He thinks he saved himself.” 
“Maybe he’s right.” 
“Maybe he is.” 
“What do you think?” 
“That he was lucky to have us both.” 
Consolata shook crumbs from the basket and folded the napkin 
246 Consolata  
neatly inside. They traded that basket back and forth for years. 
Other than with Mary Magna, “stepping in” was of no use. There was 
no call for it. The light Consolata could not bear to approach her own 
eyes, she endured for the Reverend Mother when she became ill. At 
ﬁrst she tried it out of the weakness of devotion turned to panic— 
nothing seemed to relieve the sick woman—then, angered by helpless -
ness, she assumed an attitude of command. Stepping in to ﬁnd the 
pinpoint of light. Manipulating it, widening it, strengthening it. Reviv -
ing, even raising, her from time to time. And so intense were the step-
pings in, Mary Magna glowed like a lamp till her very last breath in 
Consolata’s arms. So she had practiced, and although it was for the 
beneﬁt of the woman she loved, she knew it was anathema, that Mary 
Magna would have recoiled in disgust and fury knowing her life was 
prolonged by evil. That the bliss of that ﬁnal entrance was being delib -
erately delayed by one who ought to know better. So Consolata never 
told her. Yet, however repugnant, the gift did not evaporate. Troubling 
as it was, yoking the sin of pride to witchcraft, she came to terms with it 
in a way she persuaded herself would not offend Him or place her soul 
in peril. It was a question of language. Lone called it “stepping in.” 
Consolata said it was “seeing in.” Thus the gift was “in sight.” Some -
thing God made free to anyone who wanted to develop it. It was devi -
ous but it settled the argument between herself and Lone and made it 
possible for her to accept Lone’s remedies for all sorts of ills and to 
experiment with others while the “in sight” blazed away. The dimmer 
the visible world, the more dazzling her “in sight” became. 
When Mary Magna died, Consolata, ﬁfty-four years old, was 
orphaned in a way she was not as a street baby and was never as a 
servant. There was reason the Church cautioned against excessive 
human love and when Mary Magna left her, Consolata accepted the 
sympathy of her two friends, the help and murmurs of support from 
Mavis, the efforts to cheer her from Grace, but her rope to the world 
had slid from her ﬁngers. She had no identiﬁcation, no insurance, no 
family, no work. Facing extinction, waiting to be evicted, wary of God, 
she felt like a curl of paper—nothing written on it—lying in the corner 
247 P ARADISE  
of an empty closet. They had promised to take care of her always but 
did not tell her that always was not all ways nor forever. Prisoner wine 
helped until it didn’t and she found herself, full of a drinker’s malice, 
wishing she had the strength to beat the life out of the women free -
loading in the house. “God don’t make mistakes,” Lone had shouted 
at her. Perhaps not, but He was sometimes overgenerous. Like giving 
satanic gifts to a drunken, ignorant, penniless woman living in dark -
ness unable to rise from a cot to do something useful or die on it and 
rid the world of her stench. Gray-haired, her eyes drained of what eyes 
were made for, she imagined how she must appear. Her colorless eyes 
saw nothing clearly except what took place in the minds of others. 
Exactly the opposite of that blind season when she rutted in dirt with 
the living man and thought she was seeing for the ﬁrst time because 
she was looking so hard. But she had been spoken to, half cursed, half 
blessed. He had burned the green away and replaced it with pure sight 
that damned her if she used it. 
Footsteps, then a knock, interrupted her sad, dead-end thoughts. 
The girl opened the door. 
“Connie?” 
“Who else?” 
“It’s me, Pallas. I called my father again. So. You know. He’s meet -
ing me in Tulsa. I came to say goodbye.” 
“I see.” 
“It’s been great. I needed to. Well, it’s been forever since I last 
saw him.” 
“That long?” 
“Can you believe it?” 
“Hard to. You’ve fattened up.” 
“Yeah. I know.” 
“What will you do about it?” 
“Same as always. Diet.” 
“I don’t mean that. I mean the baby. You’re pregnant.” 
“I am not.” 
“No?” 
248 Consolata  
“No!” 
“Why not?” 
“I’m only sixteen!” 
“Oh,” said Consolata, looking at the moon head ﬂoating above a 
spine, the four little appendages—paws or hands or hooves or feet. 
Hard to tell at that stage. Pallas could be carrying a lamb, a baby, a 
jaguar. “Pity,” she said as Pallas ﬂed from the room. And “pity” again as 
she imagined the child’s probable life with its silly young mother. She 
remembered another girl, about the same age, who had come a few 
years ago—at a very bad time. For seventeen days Consolata had been 
inside, alone, keeping Mary Magna’s breath coming and going, the 
cool blue light ﬂickering until Mary Magna asked permission to 
go, bereft though she was of the last sacrament. The second girl, 
Grace, had arrived in time to hold off the fearful loneliness that 
dropped the moment the body was removed, letting Consolata sleep. 
Mavis had just returned with Lourdes water and illegal painkillers. 
Consolata welcomed the company which distracted her from self-
pitying thoughts of eviction, starvation and an uncontrite death. 
Minus papers or patron she was as vulnerable as she had been at nine 
when she clung to Mary Magna’s hand at the railing of the Atenas. 
Whatever help Lone DuPres or Soane might offer could not include 
shelter. Not in that town. 
Then the girl from Ruby came. A cup of tears just behind her eyes. 
And something else. She was not anxious, as might have been 
expected, but revolted by the work of her womb. A revulsion so severe 
it cut mind from body and saw its ﬂesh-producing ﬂesh as foreign, 
rebellious, unnatural, diseased. Consolata could not fathom what 
brought on that repugnance, but there it was. And here it was again in 
the No! shout of another one: a terror without alloy. With the ﬁrst one 
Consolata did what she knew Mary Magna would have done: quieted 
the girl and advised her to wait her time. Told her that she was wel -
come to deliver there if she wanted to. Mavis was jubilant, Grace 
amused. They took the ﬁeld rent and drove off to shop for the expected 
newborn, returning with booties and diapers and dolls enough for a 
kindergarten. The girl, sharp in her refusal to have the midwife attend 
her, waited quietly sullen for a week or so. Or so Consolata thought. 
249 P ARADISE  
What she did not know until labor began was that the young mother 
had been hitting her stomach relentlessly. Had Consolata’s eyesight 
been better and had the girl’s skin not been black as an ocean lover’s 
night, she would have seen the bruises at once. As it was, she saw 
swellings and wide areas where the skin showed purple underneath, 
rather than silver. But the real damage was the mop handle inserted 
with a rapist’s skill—mercilessly, repeatedly—between her legs. With 
the gusto and intention of a rabid male, she had tried to bash the life 
out of her life. And, in a way, was triumphantly successful. The ﬁve- or 
six-month baby revolted. Feisty, outraged, rigid with fright, it tried to 
escape the battering and battered ship that carried it. The blows to its 
delicate skull, the trouncing its hind parts took. The shudders in its 
spine. Otherwise there was no hope. Had it not tried to rescue itself, it 
would break into pieces or drown in its mother’s food. So he was born, 
in a manner of speaking, too soon and fatigued by the ﬂight. But 
breathing. Sort of. Mavis took over. Grace went to bed. Together Con -
solata and Mavis cleaned his eyes, stuck their ﬁngers in his throat, 
clearing it for air, and tried to feed him. It worked for a few days, then 
he surrendered himself to the company of Merle and Pearl. By that 
time the mother was gone, having never touched, glanced at, inquired 
after or named him. Grace called him Che and Consolata did not 
know to this day where he was buried. Only that she had murmured 
Agnus Dei, qui tollis peccata mundi: miserere nobis over the three 
pounds of gallant but defeated life before Mavis, smiling and cooing, 
carried it away. 
Just as well, thought Consolata. Life with that mother would have 
been hell for Che. Now here was another one screaming No! as if that 
made it so. Pity. 
Reaching for a bottle, Consolata found it empty. She sighed and 
sat back in the chair. Without wine her thoughts, she knew, would 
be unbearable: resignation, self-pity, muted rage, disgust and shame 
glowing like cinders in a dying ﬁre. As she rose to replenish her vice, 
a grand weariness took her, forcing her back to the seat, tipping her 
chin on her chest. She slept herself into sobriety. Headachy, sandy-
mouthed she woke in quick need of a toilet. On the second ﬂoor, she 
250 Consolata  
could hear snifﬂes behind one door, singing behind another. Back 
down the stairs, she decided to catch a little air and shufﬂed into the 
kitchen and out the door. The sun had gone leaving behind a friend -
lier light. Consolata surveyed the winter-plagued garden. Tomato 
vines hung limp over fallen fruit, black and smashed in the dirt. Mus -
tards were pale yellow with rot and inattention. A whole spill of mel -
ons caved in on themselves near heads of chrysanthemums stricken 
mud brown. A few chicken feathers were stuck to the low wire fencing 
protecting the garden from whatever it could. Without human help, 
gopher holes, termite castles, evidence of rabbit forays and determined 
crows abounded. The corn scrabble in neatly harvested ﬁelds beyond 
looked forlorn. And the pepper bushes, held on to by the wrinkled ﬁn -
gers of their yield, were rigid with cold. Despite the grains of soil blow -
ing against her legs, Consolata sat down in the faded red chair. 
“Non sum dignus,” she whispered. “But tell me. Where is the rest 
of days, the aisle of thyme, the scent of veronica you promised? The 
cream and honey you said I had earned? The happiness that comes of 
well-done chores, the serenity duty grants us, the blessings of good 
works? Was what I did for love of you so terrible?” 
Mary Magna had nothing to say. Consolata listened to the refus -
ing silence, more wondering than annoyed by the sky, in plumage 
now, gold and blue-green, strutting like requited love on the horizon. 
She was afraid of dying alone, ungrieved in unholy ground, but knew 
that was precisely what lay before her. How she longed for the good 
death. “I’ll miss You,” she told Him. “I really will.” The skylight 
wavered. 
A man approached. Medium height, light step, he came right on up 
the drive. He wore a cowboy hat that hid his features, but Consolata 
couldn’t have seen them anyway. Where he sat on the kitchen steps, 
framed by the door, a triangle of shadow obscured his face but not his 
clothes: a green vest over a white shirt, red suspenders hanging low on 
either side of his tan trousers, shiny black work shoes. 
“Who is that?” she asked. 
251 P ARADISE  
“Come on, girl. You know me.” He leaned forward, and she saw 
that he wore sunglasses—the mirror type that glitter. 
“No,” she said. “Can’t say I do.” 
“Well, not important. I’m traveling here.” There were ten yards 
between them, but his words licked her cheek. 
“You from the town?” 
“Uh uh. I’m far country. Got a thing to drink?” 
“Look you in the house.” Consolata was beginning to slide toward 
his language like honey oozing from a comb. 
“Oh, well,” he said, as though that settled it and he would rather 
go thirsty. 
“Just holler,” said Consolata. “The girls can bring you something.” 
She felt light, weightless, as though she could move, if she wanted to, 
without standing up. 
“Don’t you know me better than that?” the man asked. “I don’t 
want see your girls. I want see you.” 
Consolata laughed. “You have your glasses much more me.” 
Suddenly he was next to her without having moved—smiling like 
he was having (or expecting) such a good time. Consolata laughed 
again. It seemed so funny, comical really, the way he had ﬂitted over to 
her from the steps and how he was looking at her—ﬂirtatious, full of 
secret fun. Not six inches from her face, he removed his tall hat. Fresh, 
tea-colored hair came tumbling down, cascading over his shoulders 
and down his back. He took off his glasses then and winked, a slow 
seductive movement of a lid. His eyes, she saw, were as round and 
green as new apples. 
In candlelight on a bitter January evening, Consolata cleans, washes 
and washes again two freshly killed hens. They are young, poor layers 
with pinfeathers difﬁcult to extract. Their hearts, necks, giblets and liv -
ers turn slowly in boiling water. She lifts the skin to reach under it, ﬁn -
gering as far as she can. Under the breast, she searches for a pocket 
close to the wing. Then, holding the breast in her left palm, the ﬁngers 
of her right tunnel the back skin, gently pushing for the spine. Into all 
these places—where the skin has been loosened and the membrane 
252 Consolata  
separated from the ﬂesh it once protected—she slides butter. Thick. 
Pale. Slippery. 
Pallas wiped her eyes with the heel of her hand and then blew her 
nose. Now what? 
This latest phone call, which she had mentioned to Connie, was 
not very different from the initial one. Just shorter. But it produced the 
same frustration as what had passed for conversation with her father 
last summer. 
Jesus Christ where the hell are you? We thought you were dead. 
Thank God. They found the car but it’s bashed to hell on one side and 
somebody stripped it. You okay? Oh, baby. Daddy. Where is he—boy 
is his ass over. Tell me what happened. Your bitch mother’s not making 
any sense as usual. Did he hurt you? Daddy, no. Well, what? Was he 
alone? We’re suing the school, baby. Got them by the short hairs. It 
wasn’t him. Some boys chased me. What? In their truck. They hit my car 
and forced me off the road. I ran and then— They rape you? Daddy! 
Hold on sweetheart. Jo Anne get me that detective guy. Tell him I got 
Pallas. No, she’s okay, just get him, will you? Go ahead, baby. I’m 
Where are you? Will you come and get me Daddy? Of course I will. 
Right away. Do you need money? Can you get to an airport, a train sta -
tion? Just tell me where you’ll be. Wait. Maybe you should call the 
police. The local ones I mean. They can get you to an airport. Tell 
them to call me. No. You call me from the station. Where are you? Pal -
las? Where you calling from? Pallas, you there? Minnesota. Min-
nesota? Jesus. I thought you were in New Mexico. What the hell’s up 
there? Bloomington? No, Saint Paul. Are you near Saint Paul, sweet -
heart? I’m not near anything, Daddy. It’s like country. Call the police, 
Pallas. Make them come get you, you hear? Okay, Daddy. Then call 
me from the station. Okay. You got that? You’re not hurt or anything? 
No Daddy. Good. Okay, now. I’ll be right here or Jo Anne will if I go 
out. Boy what you put me through. But everything’s going to be okay 
now. We’ll talk about that asshole when you get back. Okay, now? Call 
me. We have to talk. Love you, baby. 
Talk. Sure. Pallas didn’t call anybody—police, Dee Dee, or him— 
253 P ARADISE  
until August. He was furious but wired her traveling money all the 
same. 
If they had laughed behind her back before Carlos, if they had 
joked at her expense then, it came to her only as pale sensation: a bro -
ken gesture upon entering study hall; an eye slide as she turned away 
from her locker; an unstable smile as she joined a crowded lunch 
table. She had never been truly popular, but her address and her 
father’s money hid the fact. Now she was an open joke (Pallas Truelove 
ran off with the jaaa-ni-tor don’t you love it?) that no one tried to hide. 
She was back in that place where ﬁnal wars are waged, the organized 
trenches of high school, where shame is the plate-shifting time it takes 
to walk down the hall, failure is a fumble with the combination lock 
and loathing is a condom wafer clogging a fountain. Where aside from 
the exchange of clothes and toys, there are no good intentions. Where 
smugness reigns, judgments instant, dismissals permanent. And the 
adults haven’t a clue. Only prison could be as blatant and as frighten -
ing, for beneath its rules and rituals scratched a life of gnawing vio -
lence. Those who came from peaceful well-regulated homes were 
overtaken by a cruelty that visited them as soon as they entered the 
gates. Cruelty decked out in juvenile glee. 
Pallas tried. But the humiliation wore her down. Milton pumped 
her about her mother. He had been warned about the consequences of 
marrying outside his own people, and every warning had come true: 
Dee Dee was irresponsible, amoral; a slut if the truth be told. Pallas 
was vague, noncommittal in her answers. He was still pursuing a law -
suit against the school for its lax and endangering environment, not 
to speak of its criminally inclined employees. But the “victim” of the 
“abduction” had gone willingly; and the destination of the “across 
state lines” journey was the “victim’s” own mother. How criminal 
could that be? Was there something going on in the father’s home they 
should know about? Something that made the daughter want to, eager 
to, escape to her mother? Furthermore, nothing untoward had hap -
pened on school grounds—except the repair of the “victim’s” car and 
safe guidance home. Also the “abduction” took place during the holi -
day when the school was closed. Moreover, the “victim” had not only 
gone willingly, she had cooperated and deceived to voluntarily accom -
254 Consolata  
pany a man (an artist, even) who had no priors and whose demeanor 
and work at the high school was exemplary. Had she been assaulted by 
him sexually? The “victim” said No, no, no, no. Did he drug her, give 
her something illegal to smoke? Pallas shook her head no, remember -
ing that it was her mother who did that. Who were these people who 
hit your car? I don’t know. I never saw their faces. I got out of there. 
Where to? I hitched and some people took me in. Who? Some people. 
In a church kind of place. In Minnesota? No, Oklahoma. What’s the 
address, phone number? Daddy, give it up. I’m home, okay? Yeah but I 
don’t want to have to worry about you. Don’t. Don’t. 
Pallas didn’t feel well. Everything she ate added a pound in spite of 
the fact that she threw most of it up. Thanksgiving she spent alone, 
with food Providence had prepared. Christmas she begged relief. Mil -
ton said No. You stay right here. Just Chicago, she said, to visit his 
sister. He agreed, ﬁnally, and his executive secretary made the arrange -
ments. Pallas stayed with her aunt till December 30, when she took off 
(leaving a reassuringly misleading note). At the Tulsa airport, it took 
two and a half hours to hire a car and driver to take her all the way to 
the Convent. Just a visit, she said. Just to ﬁnd out how everybody was, 
she said. And who, besides herself, she could fool. Nobody apparently. 
Connie glimpsed in an instant. Now what? 
Consolata tilts the fowl and peers into their silver and rose cavities. She 
tosses in salt and scours it all around, then rubs the outer skin with a 
cinnamon and butter mixture. Onion is added to the bits of neck meat, 
hearts and giblets speckling the broth. As soon as the hens are roasted 
brown enough and tender she sets them aside so they can reclaim their 
liquids. 
Lukewarm and shallow, the tub water rose only to her waist. Gigi liked 
it deep, hot, heavy with bubbles. The plumbing in the mansion was 
breaking up: producing colored water, heaving and sometimes failing 
to rise to the second ﬂoor. The well water passed through a wood-fed 
boiler nobody other than herself was interested in preserving. She was 
255 P ARADISE  
an habitual nuisance, trying to accumulate gallons of piping-hot water 
from a decrepit system that was worse than ever in winter. Seneca, of 
course, had helped out, bringing several pails of steamy water from the 
kitchen stove to the bathroom. For bubbles she poured in grains of 
Ivory Snow and whipped the water up as best she could, although the 
result was a disappointing slime. She had asked Seneca to join her in 
the tub, got the usual refusal, and although she understood why her 
friend preferred not to be seen naked, Gigi couldn’t resist teasing her 
about the infrequency of her bathing. The bloody toilet tissue she had 
seen, but the ridges on Seneca’s skin had only been felt under the cov -
ers. Blunt and obnoxious as she could be, Gigi could not ask her about 
them. The answer might come too close to the bleeding black boy 
scene. 
She stretched her legs out and lifted her feet to admire them, as 
she had done many times when she ran them up K.D.’s spine while 
she lay in the loft and he sat with his naked back to her. She missed 
him, now and then. His chaotic devotion, full of moods and hurts and 
yearning and lots and lots of giving in. Well, she had dogged him a bit. 
Enjoyed his availability and adoration because she had so little experi -
ence of either. Mikey. Nobody could call that love. But K.D.’s version 
didn’t stay fun for long. She had teased, insulted or refused him once 
too often, and he chased her around the house, grabbed her, smacked 
her. Mavis and Seneca had pulled him off, used kitchen equipment 
on him and got him out of there—all three of them answering his 
curses with better ones of their own. 
Ah, well. This is a new year, she thought. Nineteen seventy-ﬁve. 
New plans, since the old ones had turned out to be trash. When she 
ﬁnally got the box out of the bathroom tile, she whooped to ﬁnd it full 
of certiﬁcates. The bank ofﬁcer was tickled, too, and offered her 
twenty-ﬁve dollars for the pleasure of framing them or putting them in 
a display case for the amusement of his customers. Not every day you 
could see documentation of one of the biggest scams in the West. She 
held out for ﬁfty dollars and stomped out of the bank ordering Mavis to 
just drive, please. 
She would make Seneca leave with her. For good this time. Get 
back in the fray. Somehow. Somewhere. Her mother was unlocatable; 
256 Consolata  
her father on death row. Only a grandfather left, in a spiffy trailer in 
Alcorn, Mississippi. She had not thought about it too carefully, but 
now she wondered exactly why she had left. The fray, that is. It wasn’t 
just the bleeding boy or Mikey’s trick about the couple making out in 
the desert or the short guy’s advice about clear water and entwined 
trees. Before Mikey, the point of it all was lost to entertainment and 
adventure. Provocative demonstrations, pamphlets, bickering, police, 
squatters, leaders and talking, talking, so much talk. None of it was 
serious. Gigi lifted soapy hands to reclasp a roller in her hair. Neither a 
high school nor a college student, no one, not even the other girls, 
took her seriousness seriously. If she hadn’t been able to print, no one 
would have known she was there. Except Mikey. “Bastards,” she said 
aloud. And then, not knowing which of the bastards infuriated her 
most, she slapped the awful bathwater, hissing “Shit!” with each 
stroke. It calmed her after a while, enough for her to lean back in the 
tub, cover her face and whisper into her dripping wet palms, “No, you 
stupid, stupid bitch. Because you weren’t tough enough. Smart 
enough. Like with every other goddamn thing you got no staying 
power. You thought it was going to be fun and that it would work. In a 
season or two. You thought we were hot lava and when they broke us 
down into sand, you ran.” 
Gigi was not the crying type; even now, when she realized she had 
not approved of herself in a long, long time, her eyes were desert-
skull dry. 
Consolata is peeling and quartering small brown potatoes. She sim -
mers them in water seasoned with pan juices, bay leaf and sage before 
arranging them in a skillet where they turn darkly gold. She sprinkles 
paprika and seeds of blackest pepper over them. “Oh, yes,” she says. 
“Oh, yes.” 
Best goddamn thing on wheels was how he put it, and Mavis hoped 
his affection for the ten-year-old Cadillac meant he’d give her a break. 
She would never know if he did, but just before his shop closed for 
257 P ARADISE  
the day, the mechanic ﬁnished and took ﬁfty labor, thirty-two parts, oil 
and gas thirteen, so almost all of the cornﬁeld rent money was gone. 
Not another payment due from Mr. Person for three months. Still, 
there was enough for regular shopping, plus the paint Connie wanted 
(for the red chair, she guessed; but white too, so maybe the chicken 
coop), as well as the ice cream sticks. The twins were fond of them 
and ate them right away. But the Christmas toys had been untouched, 
so Mavis had spent the ﬁve-hour wait for the tuneup and repairs 
exchanging the Fisher-Price truck for a Tonka and the Tiny Tina 
doll for one that spoke. Soon Pearl would be old enough for a Barbie. 
It was amazing how they changed and grew. They could not hold their 
heads up when they departed, but when she ﬁrst heard them in the 
mansion, they were already toddlers, two years old. Based on their 
laughter, she could tell precisely. And based on how well integrated 
they were with the other children who chased about the rooms, 
she knew how they grew. Now they were school age, six and a half, 
and Mavis had to think of age-appropriate birthday and Christmas 
presents. 
She had been so lonely for them when she’d traveled back to Mary -
land in 1970. Watching recess at the school where she had enrolled 
Sal, Frankie and Billy James, she realized with a shock that Sal would 
be in junior high now, Billy James in third grade and Frankie in ﬁfth. 
Still, there was no question in her mind that she would recognize 
them, although she wasn’t sure she would identify herself. It may have 
been her ﬁngers clawed into the playground fencing or something awry 
in her face; whatever it was it must have frightened the students 
because a man came over and asked her questions—none of which she 
could answer. She hurried away trying to hide and look at the same 
time. She wanted to get to Peg’s house but not be seen by Frank or next-
door neighbors. When she found it—the bonneted girl still led the 
ducks—she wept. The rose of Sharon, so strong and wild and beautiful, 
had been chopped completely down. Only fear of being recognized 
kept her from running through the street. With swift and brilliant clar -
ity, she understood that she was not safe out there or any place where 
Merle and Pearl were not. And that was before she telephoned Birdie 
258 and learned of the warrant. Consolata  
Mavis had pushed her hair into a dark green tam, bought a pair of 
dime-store glasses and taken a bus to Washington, D.C., and on to 
Chicago. There she made the purchases Connie wanted for Mother, 
took another bus, another and arrived at the bus depot parking lot in 
Middleton, where she had left the Cadillac. Rushing to get the sup -
plies to Connie and be in the company of her twins, she sped all the 
way. Nervous, shallow of breath, Mavis skidded up the driveway and 
braked near a nude Gigi who had already taken up residence in her 
shelter. For three years they bickered and fought and managed, for 
Connie’s sake, to avoid murder. Mavis believed that it was Gigi’s dis -
traction with the man from Ruby that kept either one from picking up 
a knife. For Mavis would have done it, fought to the end anybody, 
including that street-tough bitch, who threatened to take her life and 
leave her children unprotected. So it was with sincere, even extrava -
gant, welcome that she had greeted sweet Seneca. A welcome Gigi 
shared completely, for when Seneca arrived, she spit out that K.D. per -
son like a grape seed. In the new conﬁguration, Mavis’ pride of place 
was secure. Even the sad little rich girl with the hurt but pretty face 
had not disturbed it. The twins were happy, and Mavis was still closer 
to Connie than any of the others. And it was because they were so 
close, understood each other so well, that Mavis had begun to worry. 
Not about Connie’s nocturnal habits, or her drinking—or her not 
drinking, in fact, for the familiar fumes had disappeared recently. 
Something else. The way Connie nodded as though listening to some -
one near; how she said Uh huh or If you say so, answering questions no 
one had asked. Also she not only had stopped using sunglasses but was 
dressed up, sort of, every day, in one of the dresses Soane Morgan used 
to give her when she was through with them. And on her feet were the 
shiny nun shoes that once sat on her dresser. But with merry laughter 
ringing in her own ears, ice cream sticks melting in the dead of winter, 
she was in a weak position to judge such things. Connie never ques -
tioned the reality of the twins and for Mavis, who had no intention of 
explaining or defending what she knew to be true, that acceptance was 
central. The night visitor was making fewer and fewer appearances, 
259 P ARADISE  
and while that concerned her, what preoccupied her was how fast 
Merle and Pearl were growing. And whether she could keep up. 
Six yellow apples, wrinkled from winter storage, are cored and ﬂoating 
in water. Raisins are heating in a saucepan of wine. Consolata ﬁlls the 
hollow of each apple with a creamy mixture of egg yolks, honey, 
pecans and butter, to which she adds, one by one, the wine-swollen 
raisins. She pours the ﬂavored wine into a pan and plops the apples 
down in. The sweet, warm ﬂuid moves. 
The little streets were narrow and straight, but as soon as she made 
them they ﬂooded. Sometimes she held toilet tissue to catch the 
blood, but she liked to let it run too. The trick was to slice at just the 
right depth. Not too light, or the cut yielded too faint a line of red. Not 
so deep it rose and gushed over so fast you couldn’t see the street. 
Although she had moved the map from her arms to her thighs, she 
recognized with pleasure the traces of old roads, avenues that even 
Norma had been repelled by. One was sometimes enough for months. 
Then there were times when she did two a day, hardly giving a street 
time to close before she opened another one. But she was not reckless. 
Her instruments were clean, her iodine (better than Mercurochrome) 
plentiful. And she had added aloe cream to her kit. 
The habit, begun in one of the foster homes, started as an 
accident. Before her foster brother—another kid in Mama Greer’s 
house—got her underwear off the ﬁrst time, a safety pin holding the 
waist of her jeans together where a metal button used to be opened 
and scratched her stomach as Harry yanked on them. Once the jeans 
were tossed away and he got to her panties, the line of blood excited 
him even more. She did not cry. It did not hurt. When Mama Greer 
bathed her, she clucked, “Poor baby. Why didn’t you tell me?” and 
Mercurochromed the jagged cut. She was not sure what she should 
have told: the safety pin scratch or Harry’s behavior. So she pin-
scratched herself on purpose and showed it to Mama Greer. Because 
the sympathy she got was diluted, she told her about Harry. “Don’t you 
260 Consolata  
ever say that again. Do you hear me? Do you? Nothing like that hap -
pens here.” After a meal of her favorite things, she was placed in 
another home. Nothing happened for years. Until junior high school, 
then the eleventh grade. By then she knew that there was something 
inside her that made boys snatch her and men ﬂash her. If she was 
drinking Coke with ﬁve girls at a dime store counter, she was the one 
whose nipple got tweaked by a boy on a dare from his sniggering 
friends. Four girls, or just one, might walk down the street, but when 
she passed the man sitting with his baby daughter on a park bench, it 
was then he lifted his penis out and made kissing noises. Refuge with 
boyfriends was no better. They took her devotion for granted, but if she 
complained to them about being fondled by friends or strangers their 
fury was directed at her, so she knew it was something inside that was 
the matter. 
She entered the vice like a censored poet whose suspect lexicon 
was too supple, too shocking to publish. It thrilled her. It steadied her. 
Access to this under garment life kept her own eyes dry, inducing a 
serenity rocked only by crying women, the sight of which touched off a 
pain so wildly triumphant she would do anything to kill it. She was ten 
and not cutting sidewalks when Kennedy was killed and the whole 
world wept in public. But she was ﬁfteen when King was killed one 
spring and another Kennedy that summer. She called in sick to her 
baby-sitting job each time and stayed indoors to cut short streets, lanes, 
alleys into her arms. Her blood work was fairly easy to hide. Like Eddie 
Turtle, most of her boyfriends did it in the dark. For those who insisted 
on answers she invented a disease. Sympathy was instant for the scars 
did look surgical. 
The safety available in Connie’s house had become less intact 
when Pallas arrived. She had spent a lot of time trying to cheer and 
feed her, for when Pallas wasn’t eating she was crying or trying not to. 
The relief that descended when the girl left last August disappeared 
when she returned in December—prettier, fatter, pretending she had 
just stopped by for a visit. In a limousine, no less. With three suitcases. 
It was January now, and her night snifﬂing could be heard all over the 
house. 
261 P ARADISE  
the one she’d done a moment ago. 
The table is set; the food placed. Consolata takes off her apron. 
With the aristocratic gaze of the blind she sweeps the women’s faces 
and says, “I call myself Consolata Sosa. If you want to be here you 
do what I say. Eat how I say. Sleep when I say. And I will teach you 
what you are hungry for.” 
The women look at each other and then at a person they do not 
recognize. She has the features of dear Connie, but they are sculpted 
somehow—higher cheekbones, stronger chin. Had her eyebrows 
always been that thick, her teeth that pearly white? Her hair shows no 
gray. Her skin is smooth as a peach. Why is she talking that way? And 
what is she talking about? they wonder. This sweet, unthreatening old 
lady who seemed to love each one of them best; who never criticized, 
who shared everything but needed little or no care; required no emo -
tional investment; who listened; who locked no doors and accepted 
each as she was. What is she talking about, this ideal parent, friend, 
companion in whose company they were safe from harm? What is she 
thinking, this perfect landlord who charged nothing and welcomed 
anybody; this granny goose who could be conﬁded in or ignored, lied 
to or suborned; this play mother who could be hugged or walked out 
on, depending on the whim of the child? 
“If you have a place,” she continued, “that you should be in and 
somebody who loves you waiting there, then go. If not stay here and 
follow me. Someone could want to meet you.” 
No one left. There were nervous questions, a single burst of fright -
ened giggling, a bit of pouting and simulated outrage, but in no time at 
all they came to see that they could not leave the one place they were 
free to leave. 
Gradually they lost the days. 
In the beginning the most important thing was the template. First they 
262 Seneca did another street. An intersection, in fact, for it crossed Consolata  
had to scrub the cellar ﬂoor until its stones were as clean as rocks on a 
shore. Then they ringed the place with candles. Consolata told each to 
undress and lie down. In ﬂattering light under Consolata’s soft vision 
they did as they were told. How should we lie? However you feel. They 
tried arms at the sides, outstretched above the head, crossed over 
breasts or stomach. Seneca lay on her stomach at ﬁrst, then changed to 
her back, hands clasping her shoulders. Pallas lay on her side, knees 
drawn up. Gigi ﬂung her legs and arms apart, while Mavis struck a 
ﬂoater’s pose, arms angled, knees pointing in. When each found the 
position she could tolerate on the cold, uncompromising ﬂoor, Conso -
lata walked around her and painted the body’s silhouette. Once the 
outlines were complete, each was instructed to remain there. 
Unspeaking. Naked in candlelight. 
They wriggled in acute distress but were reluctant to move outside 
the mold they had chosen. Many times they thought they could not 
endure another second, but none wished to be the ﬁrst to give in 
before those pale watching eyes. Consolata spoke ﬁrst. 
“My child body, hurt and soil, leaps into the arms of a woman who 
teach me my body is nothing my spirit everything. I agreed her until I 
met another. My ﬂesh is so hungry for itself it ate him. When he fell 
away the woman rescue me from my body again. Twice she saves it. 
When her body sickens I care for it in every way ﬂesh works. I hold it in 
my arms and between my legs. Clean it, rock it, enter it to keep it 
breath. After she is dead I can not get past that. My bones on hers the 
only good thing. Not spirit. Bones. No different from the man. My 
bones on his the only true thing. So I wondering where is the spirit lost 
in this? It is true, like bones. It is good, like bones. One sweet, one 
bitter. Where is it lost? Hear me, listen. Never break them in two. 
Never put one over the other. Eve is Mary’s mother. Mary is the daugh -
ter of Eve.” 
Then, in words clearer than her introductory speech (which none 
of them understood), she told them of a place where white sidewalks 
met the sea and ﬁsh the color of plums swam alongside children. She 
spoke of fruit that tasted the way sapphires look and boys using rubies 
for dice. Of scented cathedrals made of gold where gods and goddesses 
sat in the pews with the congregation. Of carnations tall as trees. 
263 P ARADISE  
Dwarfs with diamonds for teeth. Snakes aroused by poetry and bells. 
Then she told them of a woman named Piedade, who sang but never 
said a word. 
That is how the loud dreaming began. How the stories rose in that 
place. Half-tales and the never-dreamed escaped from their lips to soar 
high above guttering candles, shifting dust from crates and bottles. 
And it was never important to know who said the dream or whether it 
had meaning. In spite of or because their bodies ache, they step easily 
into the dreamer’s tale. They enter the heat in the Cadillac, feel the 
smack of cold air in the Higgledy Piggledy. They know their tennis 
shoes are unlaced and that a bra strap annoys each time it slips from 
the shoulder. The Armour package is sticky. They inhale the perfume 
of sleeping infants and feel parent-cozy although they notice one’s 
head is turned awkwardly. They adjust the sleeping baby head then 
refuse, outright refuse, what they know and drive away home. They 
climb porch stairs carrying frankfurters and babies and purse in their 
arms. Saying, “They don’t seem to want to wake up, Sal. Sal? Look 
here. They don’t seem to want to.” They kick their legs underwater, 
but not too hard for fear of waking ﬁns or scales also down below. The 
male voices saying saying forever saying push their own down their 
throats. Saying, saying until there is no breath to scream or contradict. 
Each one blinks and gags from tear gas, moves her hand slowly to the 
scraped shin, the torn ligament. Runs up and down the halls by day, 
sleeps in a ball with the lights on at night. Folds the ﬁve hundred dol -
lars in the foot of her sock. Yelps with pain from a stranger’s penis and a 
mother’s rivalry—alluring and corrosive as cocaine. 
In loud dreaming, monologue is no different from a shriek; accu -
sations directed to the dead and long gone are undone by murmurs of 
love. So, exhausted and enraged, they rise and go to their beds vow -
ing never to submit to that again but knowing full well they will. And 
they do. 
Life, real and intense, shifted to down there in limited pools of 
light, in air smoky from kerosene lamps and candle wax. The tem -
plates drew them like magnets. It was Pallas who insisted they shop for 
tubes of paint, sticks of colored chalk. Paint thinner and chamois 
cloth. They understood and began to begin. First with natural features: 
264 Consolata  
breasts and pudenda, toes, ears and head hair. Seneca duplicated in 
robin’s egg blue one of her more elegant scars, one drop of red at its 
tip. Later on, when she had the hunger to slice her inner thigh, she 
chose instead to mark the open body lying on the cellar ﬂoor. They 
spoke to each other about what had been dreamed and what had been 
drawn. Are you sure she was your sister? Maybe she was your mother. 
Why? Because a mother might, but no sister would do such a thing. 
Seneca capped her tube. Gigi drew a heart locket around her body’s 
throat, and when Mavis asked her about it, she said it was a gift from 
her father which she had thrown into the Gulf of Mexico. Were there 
pictures inside? asked Pallas. Yeah. Two. Whose? Gigi didn’t answer; 
she simply reinforced the dots marking the locket’s chain. Pallas had 
put a baby in her template’s stomach. When asked who the father was, 
she said nothing but drew next to the baby a woman’s face with long 
eyelashes and a crooked ﬂuffy mouth. They pressed her, but gently, 
without joking or scorn. Carlos? The boys who drove her into the 
water? Pallas gave the crooked mouth two long fangs. 
January folded. February too. By March, days passed uncut from 
night as careful etchings of body parts and memorabilia occupied 
them. Yellow barrettes, red peonies, a green cross on a ﬁeld of white. A 
majestic penis pierced with a Cupid’s bow. Rose of Sharon petals, 
Lorna Doones. A bright orange couple making steady love under a 
childish sun. 
With Consolata in charge, like a new and revised Reverend 
Mother, feeding them bloodless food and water alone to quench their 
thirst, they altered. They had to be reminded of the moving bodies 
they wore, so seductive were the alive ones below. 
A customer stopping by would have noticed little change. May 
have wondered why the garden was as yet untilled, or who had 
scratched sorrow on the Cadillac’s trunk. May even have wondered 
why the old woman who answered the knock did not cover her awful 
eyes with dark glasses; or what on earth the younger ones had done 
with their hair. A neighbor would notice more—a sense of surfeit; the 
charged air of the house, its foreign feel and a markedly different look 
in the tenants’ eyes—sociable and connecting when they spoke to you, 
otherwise they were still and appraising. But if a friend came by, her 
265 P ARADISE  
initial alarm at the sight of the young women might be muted by their 
adult manner; how calmly themselves they seemed. And Connie— 
how straight-backed and handsome she looked. How well that familiar 
dress became her. As she slid into the driver’s seat, a basket with a par -
cel on top beside her, it would annoy her at ﬁrst being unable to say 
exactly what was absent. As she drew closer to home and drove down 
Central Avenue, her gaze might fall on Sweetie Fleetwood’s house, Pat 
Best’s house, or she might notice one of the Poole boys or Menus on 
his way to Ace’s. Then she might realize what was missing: unlike 
some people in Ruby, the Convent women were no longer haunted. 
Or hunted either, she might have added. But there she would have 
been wrong. 
266 LONE  The way was narrow, the turn sharp, but she managed to get the 
Oldsmobile off the dirt and onto the tarmac without knocking 
the sign down completely. Earlier, on the way in, with the darkness 
and the single headlight, Lone couldn’t prevent the bumper from 
scraping it, and now, leaving the Convent, its post leaned and the 
sign— early melones —was about to fall. “Can’t spell worth poot,” 
she murmured. The one wrapped in a sheet, most likely. Not much 
schooling there. But “Early” was correct, and not just the letters. July 
not over, and the Convent garden had melons already ripe for picking. 
Like their heads. Smooth outside, sweet inside, but Lord, were they 
thick. None of them would listen. Said Connie was busy, refused to 
call her and didn’t believe a word Lone said. After driving out there in 
the middle of the night to tell them, warn them, she watched in help -
less fury as they yawned and smiled. Now she had to ﬁgure out what 
else to do, otherwise the melons that got split would be their bald 
heads. 
The night air was hot and the rain she had been smelling was far 
but still coming, which is what she’d thought two hours ago, when, 
hoping to harvest mandrake while it was still dry, she padded around 
the streambank near the Oven. Had she not been, she never would 
have heard the men or discovered the devilment they were cooking. 
Clouds hid the nightsky’s best jewelry but the road to Ruby was 
familiar as a collection plate. She squinted nevertheless, in case some -
thing or somebody scampered up ahead—beyond the Oldsmobile’s 
single headlight. It could be possum, raccoon, white-tail deer, or even 
269 P ARADISE  
an angry woman since it was women who walked this road. Only 
women. Never men. For more than twenty years Lone had watched 
them. Back and forth, back and forth: crying women, staring women, 
scowling, lip-biting women or women just plain lost. Out here in a red 
and gold land cut through now and then with black rock or a swatch of 
green; out here under skies so star-packed it was disgraceful; out here 
where the wind handled you like a man, women dragged their sorrow 
up and down the road between Ruby and the Convent. They were the 
only pedestrians. Sweetie Fleetwood had walked it, Billie Delia too. 
And the girl called Seneca. Another called Mavis. Arnette, too, and 
more than once. And not just these days. They had walked this road 
from the very ﬁrst. Soane Morgan, for instance, and once, when she 
was young, Connie as well. Many of the walkers Lone had seen; others 
she learned about. But the men never walked the road; they drove it, 
although sometimes their destination was the same as the women’s: 
Sargeant, K.D., Roger, Menus. And the good Deacon himself a couple 
of decades back. Well, if she did not get somebody to ﬁx the fan belt 
and plug the oil pan, she would be walking it too, provided there was 
anyplace left worth traveling to. 
If ever there was a time for speeding, this was it, but the condition 
of the car precluded that. In 1965 the wipers, the air-conditioning, the 
radio worked. Now a ﬁerce heater was the only element reminiscent of 
the Oldsmobile’s original power. In 1968, after it had had two owners, 
Deek and then Soane Morgan, Soane asked her if she could use it. 
Lone screamed her joy. Finally, at seventy-nine, unlicensed but feisty, 
she was going to learn to drive and have her own car too. No more 
hitching up the wagon, no more brakes squealing in her yard at all 
hours, summoning her to emergencies that weren’t or to standbys that 
turned into crises. She could follow her own mind, check on the 
mothers when she wished; tool on up to the house in her own car and, 
most important, leave when she wanted to. But the gift came too late. 
Just as she became truly auto mobile, nobody wanted her craft. After 
having infuriated the hooved and terriﬁed the clawed, having churned 
columns of red dust up and down tractor trails for weeks, she had no 
place to go. Her patients let her poke and peep, but for the delivery 
they traveled hours (if they could make it) to the hospital in Demby, 
270 Lone  
for the cool hands of whitemen. Now, at eighty-six, in spite of her 
never-fail reputation (which was to say she never lost a mother, as Fairy 
once had), they refused her their swollen bellies, their shrieks and 
grabbing hands. Laughed at her clean bellybands, her drops of 
mother’s urine. Poured her pepper tea in the toilet. It did not matter 
that she had curled up on their sofas to rock irritable children, nodded 
in their kitchens after braiding their daughters’ hair, planted herbs in 
their gardens and given good counsel for the past twenty-ﬁve years and 
for ﬁfty more in Haven before being sent for. No matter she taught 
them how to comb their breasts to set the milk ﬂowing; what to do with 
the afterbirth; what direction the knife under the mattress should 
point. No matter she searched the county to get them the kind of dirt 
they wanted to eat. No matter she had gotten in the bed with them, 
pressing the soles of her feet to theirs, helping them push, push! Or 
massaged their stomachs with sweet oil for hours. No matter at all. She 
had been good enough to bring them into the world, and when she 
and Fairy were summoned to continue that work in the new place, 
Ruby, the mothers sat back in their chairs, spread their knees and 
breathed with relief. Now that Fairy was dead, leaving one midwife for 
a population that needed and prided itself on families as large as neigh -
borhoods, the mothers took their wombs away from her. But Lone 
believed that there was more to it than the fashion for maternity wards. 
She had delivered the Fleetwood babies and each of the defectives had 
stained her reputation as if she had made the babies, not simply deliv -
ered them. The suspicion that she was bad luck and the comforts of 
the Demby hospital combined to deprive her of the work for which 
she was trained. One of the mothers told her that she couldn’t help 
loving the week of rest, the serving tray, the thermometer, the blood 
pressure tests; was crazy about the doze of daytime and the pain pills; 
but mostly she said she loved how people kept asking her how she felt. 
None of that was available to her if she delivered at home. There 
she’d be ﬁxing the family’s breakfast the second or third day and worry -
ing about the quality of the cow’s milk as well as her own. Others 
must have felt the same—the luxury of sleep and being away from 
home, the newborn taken each night for somebody else’s care. And 
the fathers—well, Lone suspected they, too, were happier with closed 
271 P ARADISE  
doors, waiting in the hall, being in a place where other men were in 
charge instead of some toothless woman gumming gum to keep her 
gums strong. “Don’t mistake the fathers’ thanks,” Fairy had warned 
her. “Men scared of us, always will be. To them we’re death’s hand -
maiden standing as between them and the children their wives carry.” 
During those times, Fairy said, the midwife is the interference, the 
one giving orders, on whose secret skill so much depended, and the 
dependency irritated them. Especially here in this place where they 
had come to multiply in peace. Fairy was right as usual, but Lone had 
another liability. It was said she could read minds, a gift from some -
thing that, whatever it was, was not God, and which she had used as 
early as two, when she positioned herself to be found in the yard when 
her mother was dead in the bed. Lone denied it; she believed every -
body knew what other people were thinking. They just avoided the 
obvious. Yet she did know something more profound than Morgan 
memory or Pat Best’s history book. She knew what neither memory 
nor history can say or record: the “trick” of life and its “reason.” 
In any case, her livelihood over (she had been called on twice in 
the last eight years), Lone was dependent on the generosity of congre -
gations and neighbors. She spent her time gathering medicinal herbs, 
ﬂitting from one church to another to receive a Helping Hand collec -
tion, and surveying the ﬁelds, which invited her not because they were 
open but because they were full of secrets. Like the carful of skeletons 
she’d found a few months ago. If she had been paying attention to her 
own mind instead of gossip, she would have investigated the Lenten 
buzzards as soon as they appeared—two years ago at spring thaw, 
March of 1974. But because they were seen right when the Morgans 
and Fleetwoods had announced the wedding, people were confused 
about whether the marriage was summoning the buzzards or protect -
ing the town from them. Now everybody knew they had been attracted 
to a family feast of people lost in a blizzard. Arkansas plates. Harper 
Jury’s label on some cough medicine. They loved each other, the fam -
ily did. Even with the disturbance of birds of prey, you could tell they 
were embracing as they slept deeper and deeper into that deep cold. 
At ﬁrst she thought Sargeant must have known all about it. He 
raised corn in those ﬁelds. But there was no mistaking the astonish -
272 Lone  
ment on his face or on any of the others’ when they heard. The prob -
lem was whether to notify the law or not. Not, it was decided. Even to 
bury them would be admitting to something they had no hand in. 
When some of the men went to look, much of their attention was not 
on the scene at hand but west on the Convent that loomed in their 
sight line. She should have known then. Had she been paying atten -
tion, ﬁrst to the buzzards, then to the minds of men, she would not be 
using up all her Wrigley’s and gasoline on a mission she hoped would 
be her last. Eyesight too dim, joints too stiff—this was no work for a 
gifted midwife. But God had given her the task, bless His holy heart, 
and at thirty miles an hour on a hot July night, she knew she was travel -
ing in His time, not outside it. It was He who placed her there; encour -
aged her to look for the medicine best picked dry at night. 
The streambed was dry; the coming rain would remedy that 
even as it softened the two-legged mandrake root. She had heard light 
laughter and radio music traveling from the Oven. Young couples 
courting. At least they were in the open, she thought, not scrambling 
up into a hayloft or under a blanket in the back of a truck. Then the 
laughter and the music stopped. Deep male voices gave orders; ﬂash -
lights cut shafts on bodies, faces, hands and what they carried. Without 
a murmur, the couples left, but the men didn’t. Leaning against the 
Oven’s walls or squatting on their haunches, they clustered in dark -
ness. Lone shrouded her own ﬂashlight with her apron and would 
have moved invisibly to the rear of Holy Redeemer, where her car was 
parked, had she not remembered the other events she had ignored 
or misunderstood: the Lenten buzzards; Apollo’s new handgun. She 
clicked herself back into complete darkness and sat down on the 
thirsty grass. She had to stop nursing resentment at the townspeople’s 
refusal of her services; stop stealing penny revenge by ignoring what 
was going on and letting evil have its way. Playing blind was to avoid 
the language God spoke in. He did not thunder instructions or whisper 
messages into ears. Oh, no. He was a liberating God. A teacher who 
taught you how to learn, to see for yourself. His signs were clear, abun -
dantly so, if you stopped steeping in vanity’s sour juice and paid atten -
tion to His world. He wanted her to hear the men gathered at the Oven 
to decide and ﬁgure out how to run the Convent women off, and if He 
273 P ARADISE  
wanted her to witness that, He must also want her to do something 
about it. At ﬁrst she didn’t know what was going on, or what to do. But 
as in the past when she was confused, she closed her eyes and whis -
pered, “Thy will. Thy will.” The voices rose then, and she heard as 
clear as if she had been standing among them what they said to one 
another and what they meant. What they vocalized and what they 
did not. 
There were nine of them. Some smoked, some sighed, as one by 
one they began to speak. Much of what they said Lone had heard 
before, although without the rough scales the words grew as they 
snaked through the night air. The topic was not new, but it had none 
of the delight that dressed the theme when delivered from a pulpit. 
Reverend Cary had captured the subject in a sermon so well received 
he included a version of it every Sunday. 
“What have you given up to live here?” he asked, hitting “up” like 
a soprano. “What sacriﬁce do you make every day to live here in God’s 
beauty, His bounty, His peace?” 
“Tell us, Reverend. Say it.” 
“I’ll tell you what.” Reverend Cary chuckled. 
“Yes, sir.” 
“Go ahead, now.” 
Reverend Cary had lifted his right hand straight in the air and 
curled it into a ﬁst. Then, one ﬁnger at a time, he began to list what the 
congregation had deprived itself of. 
“Television.” 
The congregation rippled with laughter. 
“Disco.” 
They laughed merrily, louder, shaking their heads. 
“Policemen.” 
They roared with laughter. 
“Picture shows, ﬁlthy music.” He continued with ﬁngers from his 
left hand. “Wickedness in the streets, theft in the night, murder in the 
morning. Liquor for lunch and dope for dinner. That’s what you have 
given up.” 
Each item drew sighs and moans of sorrow. Suffused with grati -
tude for having refused and escaped the sordid, the cruel, the ungodly, 
274 Lone  
all of the up-to-date evils disguised as pleasure, each member of the 
congregation could feel his or her heart swell with pity for those who 
wrestled with those “sacriﬁces.” 
But there was no pity here. Here, when the men spoke of the 
ruination that was upon them—how Ruby was changing in intolerable 
ways—they did not think to ﬁx it by extending a hand in fellowship or 
love. They mapped defense instead and honed evidence for its need, 
till each piece ﬁt an already polished groove. A few did most of the 
talking, some said little and two said nothing at all, but silent though 
they were, Lone knew the leadership was twinned. 
Remember how they scandalized the wedding? What you say? Uh 
huh and it was that very same day I caught them kissing on each other 
in the back of that ratty Cadillac. Very same day, and if that wasn’t 
enough to please the devil, two more was ﬁghting over them in the 
dirt. Right down in it. Lord, I hate a nasty woman. Sweetie said they 
tried their best to poison her. I heard that too. Got caught in a snow -
storm out that way and took shelter with them. Should have known 
better. Well, you know Sweetie. Anyway said she heard noises coming 
from somewhere in that house. Sounded to her like little babies cry -
ing. What in God’s name little babies doing out there? You asking me? 
Whatever it is, it ain’t natural. Well, it used to house little girls, didn’t 
it? Yeah, I remember. Said it was a school. School for what? What they 
teaching out there? Sargeant, didn’t you ﬁnd marijuana growing in the 
middle of your alfalfa? Yep. Sure did. That don’t surprise me. All I 
know is they beat Arnette up some when she went out there to con -
front them about the lies they told her. She thinks they kept her baby 
and told her it was stillborn. My wife says they did an abortion on her. 
You believe it? I don’t know, but I wouldn’t put it past them. What I do 
know is how messed up her face was. Aw, man. We can’t have this. 
Roger told me that the Mother—you know, the old white one used to 
shop here sometimes?—well, he said when she died she weighed less 
than ﬁfty pounds and shone like sulfur. Jesus! Said the girl he dropped 
off there was openly ﬂirting with him. That’s the one half naked all the 
time? I knew something was wrong with her from the time she stepped 
off the bus. How she get a bus to come out here anyway? Guess, why 
don’t you? You think they got powers? I know they got powers. Ques -
275 P ARADISE  
tion is whose power is stronger. Why don’t they just get on out, leave? 
Huh! Would you if you had a big old house to live in without having to 
work for it? Something’s going on out there, and I don’t like any of 
it. No men. Kissing on themselves. Babies hid away. Jesus! No telling 
what else. Look what happened to Billie Delia after she started hang -
ing around out there. Knocked her mama down the stairs and took off 
for that place like a shoat hunting teat. I hear they drink like ﬁsh too. 
The old woman was always drunk when I saw her and remember the 
ﬁrst words out their mouths when they came to the wedding? Anything 
to drink is what they asked for and when they got a glass of lemon -
ade, they acted like they’d been spit on and walked on out the door. I 
remember that. Bitches. More like witches. But look here, brother, the 
bones beat all. I can’t believe a whole family died out there without 
nobody knowing it. They wasn’t all that far away, know what I’m say -
ing? Can’t nobody tell me they left the road and got themselves lost in 
a ﬁeld with a big old house less than two miles away. They would have 
seen it. Had to. The man would have got out and walked to it, see what 
I mean? He could reason, couldn’t he, and even if he couldn’t reason 
he could see. How you going to miss a house that size out here in land 
ﬂat as a nail head? You saying they had something to do with it? Listen, 
nothing ever happened around here like what’s going on now. Before 
those heifers came to town this was a peaceable kingdom. The others 
before them at least had some religion. These here sluts out there by 
themselves never step foot in church and I bet you a dollar to a fat 
nickel they ain’t thinking about one either. They don’t need men and 
they don’t need God. Can’t say they haven’t been warned. Asked ﬁrst 
and then warned. If they stayed to themselves, that’d be something. 
But they don’t. They meddle. Drawing folks out there like ﬂies to shit 
and everybody who goes near them is maimed somehow and the mess 
is seeping back into our homes, our families. We can’t have it, you all. 
Can’t have it at all. 
So, Lone thought, the fangs and the tail are somewhere else. Out 
yonder all slithery in a house full of women. Not women locked safely 
away from men; but worse, women who chose themselves for com -
pany, which is to say not a convent but a coven. Lone shook her head 
and adjusted her Doublemint. She was listening only halfheartedly to 
276 Lone  
the words, trying to divine the thoughts behind them. Some of it she 
got right away. Sargeant, she knew, would be nodding at every shred of 
gossip, chewing on the rag end of truth and wondering aloud why this 
deliberately beautiful town governed by responsible men couldn’t 
remain so: stable, prosperous, with no talk-back young people. Why 
would they want to leave and raise families (and customers) else -
where? But he would be thinking how much less his outlay would be if 
he owned the Convent land, and how, if the women are gone from 
there, he would be in a better position to own it. Everyone knew he 
had already visited the Convent—to “warn” them, which is to say he 
offered to buy the place, and when the response was an incomprehen -
sible stare, he told the old woman to “think carefully” and that “other 
things could happen to lower the price.” Wisdom Poole would be 
looking for a reason to explain why he had no control anymore over his 
brothers and sisters. To explain how it happened that those who used 
to worship him, listen to him, were now strays trying to be on their 
own. The shooting last year between Brood and Apollo was over Billie 
Delia and would be enough reason for him to go gallivanting off for 
the pleasure of throwing some women in the road. Billie Delia was 
friendly with those women, made one of his younger brothers drive 
her out there, and it was after that that the trouble between Apollo and 
Brood turned dangerous. Neither one had followed Wisdom’s orders 
to never speak to or look at that girl again. The result was biblical—a 
man lying in wait to slaughter his brother. As for the Fleetwoods, 
Arnold and Jeff, well, they’d been wanting to blame somebody for 
Sweetie’s children for a long time. Maybe it was the midwife’s fault, 
maybe it was the government’s fault, but the midwife could only be 
disemployed and the government was not accountable, and although 
Lone had delivered some of Jeff’s sick children long before the ﬁrst 
woman arrived, they wouldn’t let a little thing like that keep them 
from ﬁnding fault anywhere but in their own blood. Or Sweetie’s. 
Menus, well, he’d be ripe for a raid on anybody. Spending those weeks 
out there drying out, you’d think he’d be grateful. Those women must 
have witnessed some things, seen some things he didn’t want ranging 
around in anybody’s mind in case they fell out of their mouths. Or 
maybe it was just to erase the shame he felt at having let Harper and 
277 P ARADISE  
the others talk him out of marrying that woman he brought home. 
That pretty redbone girl they told him was not good enough for him; 
said she was more like a fast woman than a bride. He let out like he 
drank because of what Vietnam had done to him, but Lone thought 
the pretty redbone girl’s loss was more to the point. He hadn’t had the 
courage to leave and go on and live with her someplace else. Chose 
instead both to submit to his father’s rule and charge him a neat price 
for it: undisturbed acceptance of his afﬂiction. Getting rid of some 
unattached women who had wiped up after him, washed his drawers, 
removed his vomit, listened to his curses as well as his sobs might 
convince him for a while that he was truly a man unpolluted by his 
mother’s weakness, worthy of his father’s patience and that he was right 
to let the redbone go. Lone could not count how many times she had 
sat in New Zion and heard his father, Harper, begin to testify, begin to 
examine his own sins and end up going on about loose women who 
could keep you from knowing who, what and where your children are. 
He’d married a Blackhorse woman, Catherine, and worried her into 
nervous digestion carrying on about what she was doing and who she 
was seeing and this and that, and was she properly instructing their 
daughter, Kate. Kate got married as fast as she could just to get out 
from under his hand. His ﬁrst wife, Menus’ mother, Martha, must 
have given him a bad time. So bad he never let their only son forget it. 
Then there was K.D., the family man. Talking about how strange one 
of those Convent girls was and how he knew it right away soon as he 
saw her get off the bus. Ha ha. He’s a daddy now of a four-month-old 
son with all its ﬁngers and toes and who knows maybe a full brain too 
courtesy of the doctor willing to treat black folks in Demby. So he and 
Arnette both sniffed their noses at Lone, and however happy Arnette 
must be now and willing to pass her earlier “mistake” off on the Con -
vent women’s tricking her, K.D. would have another grudge. The girl 
whose name he now scandalized he had stalked for years till she threw 
him out the door. Take a whole lot of healthy babies to make him for -
get that. He’s a Morgan, after all, and they haven’t forgotten a thing 
since 1755. 
Lone understood these private thoughts and some of what Stew-
ard’s and Deacon’s motive might be: neither one put up with what he 
278 Lone  
couldn’t control. But she could not have imagined Steward’s rancor— 
his bile at the thought that his grandnephew (maybe?) had surely been 
hurt or destroyed in that place. It was a ﬂoating blister in his blood -
stream, which neither shrank nor came to a head. Nor could she have 
imagined how deep in the meat of his brain stem lay the memory of 
how close his brother came to breaking up his marriage to Soane. How 
off the course Deek slid when he was looking in those poison and poi -
soning eyes. For months the two of them had met secretly, for months 
Deek was distracted, making mistakes and just suppose the hussy 
had gotten pregnant? Had a mixed-up child? Steward seethed at the 
thought of that barely averted betrayal of all they owed and promised 
the Old Fathers. But a narrowly escaped treason against the fathers’ 
law, the law of continuance and multiplication, was overwhelmed by 
the permanent threat to his cherished view of himself and his brother. 
The women in the Convent were for him a ﬂaunting parody of the 
nineteen Negro ladies of his and his brother’s youthful memory and 
perfect understanding. They were the degradation of that moment 
they’d shared of sunlit skin and verbena. They, with their mindless gig -
gling, outraged the dulcet tones, the tinkling in the merry and wel -
coming laughter of the nineteen ladies who, scheduled to live forever 
in pastel shaded dreams, were now doomed to extinction by this new 
and obscene breed of female. He could not abide them for sullying his 
personal history with their streetwalkers’ clothes and whores’ appetites; 
mocking and desecrating the vision that carried him and his brother 
through a war, that imbued their marriages and strengthened their 
efforts to build a town where the vision could ﬂourish. He would never 
forgive them that and he would not tolerate this loss of charity. 
Nor did Lone know the glacier that was Deacon Morgan’s pride. 
Its hidden bulk, its accretion and unmovability. She knew about his 
long ago relationship with Consolata. But she could not have fath -
omed his personal shame or understood how important it was to erase 
both the shame and the kind of woman he believed was its source. An 
uncontrollable, gnawing woman who had bitten his lip just to lap the 
blood it shed; a beautiful, golden-skinned, outside woman with moss-
green eyes that tried to trap a man, close him up in a cellar room with 
liquor to enfeeble him so they could do carnal things, unnatural things 
279 P ARADISE  
in the dark; a Salomé from whom he had escaped just in time or she 
would have had his head on a dinner plate. That ravenous ground-
fucking woman who had not left his life but had weaseled her way into 
Soane’s affections and, he suspected, had plied her with evil potions to 
make her less loving than she used to be and it was not the eternal 
grieving for their sons that froze her but the mess she was swallowing 
still, given to her by the woman whose very name she herself had made 
into a joke and a travesty of what a woman should be. 
Lone didn’t, couldn’t, know all, but she knew enough and the 
ﬂashlights had revealed the equipment: handcuffs glinted, rope coiled 
and she did not have to guess what else they had. Stepping softly, she 
made her way along the edge of the stream toward her car. “Thy will. 
Thy will,” she whispered, convinced that what she had heard and 
surmised was no idleness. The men had not come there merely to 
rehearse. Like boot camp recruits, like invaders preparing for slaugh -
ter, they were there to rave, to heat the blood or turn it icicle cold the 
better to execute the mission. One thing in particular she had quickly 
understood: the only voice not singing belonged to the one conduct -
ing the choir. 
“Where is Richard Misner?” Lone didn’t bother to say hello. She had 
knocked on Misner’s door, then entered his house, to ﬁnd it dark and 
empty. Now she had roused his closest neighbor, Frances Poole 
DuPres, from her sleep. Frances groaned. 
“What in the world is going on with you, Lone?” 
“Tell me where Misner is.” 
“They’re gone to Muskogee. Why?” 
“They? They who?” 
“Reverend Misner and Anna. A conference. What you need him 
for this time of night?” 
“Let me in,” said Lone, and stepped past Frances into the living 
room. 
“Come on in the kitchen,” said Frances. 
“No time. Listen.” Lone described the meeting, saying, “A whole 
passel of menfolk planning something against the Convent. Morgans, 
280 Lone  
Fleetwoods and Wisdom’s there too. They going after those women 
out there.” 
“Lord, what kind of mess is this? They’re going to scare them off 
in the middle of the night?” 
“Woman, listen to me. Those men got guns with sights on them.” 
“That doesn’t mean anything. I’ve never seen my brother go any -
where minus his riﬂe, except church, and even then it’s in the car.” 
“They got rope too, Frannie.” 
“Rope?” 
“Two-inch.” 
“What’re you thinking?” 
“We wasting time. Where’s Sut?” 
“Sleep.” 
“Wake him.” 
“I’m not going to disturb my husband for some wild—” 
“Wake him, Frannie. I am not a crazy woman and you know it.” 
The ﬁrst drops were warm and fat, carrying the scent of white loco and 
cholla from regions north and west. They smashed into gentian, desert 
trumpets and slid from chicory leaves. Plump and slippery they rolled 
like mercury beads over the cracked earth between garden rows. As 
they sat in kitchen light, Lone, Frances and Sut DuPres could see, 
even smell, the rainfall, but they could not hear it, so soft, so downy, 
were the drops. 
Sut was unconvinced that Lone’s demand to rush out and stop 
them was called for but he did agree to speak to Reverends Pulliam 
and Cary in the morning. Lone said morning might be too late and 
took off in a huff to ﬁnd somebody who didn’t talk to her as if she were 
a child unable to wake from a nightmare. Anna Flood was gone; she 
couldn’t go to Soane because of Deek; and since K.D. and Arnette had 
taken the house that Menus used to own, Dovey Morgan wouldn’t be 
in town. She thought about Kate but knew she would not go up against 
her father. She considered Penelope but dismissed her, since she was 
not only married to Wisdom, she was Sargeant’s daughter. Lone real -
ized that she would have to go out to the ranches and farms, to people 
281 P ARADISE  
she trusted most not to let family relations cloud their minds. Working 
windshield wipers were an unavailable blessing, so Lone, rolling gum 
slowly around in her mouth, concentrated on being careful. Driving 
past the deserted Oven, pleased she had gotten the mayapples in time, 
she noticed there were no lights at Anna’s place or, way back of it, in 
Deek Morgan’s house. Lone squinted to negotiate the few miles of dirt 
road between Ruby’s and the county’s. It could be a tricky stretch 
because the earth was absorbing the rain now, swelling the roots of 
parched plants and forming rivulets wherever it could. She drove 
slowly, thinking if this mission was truly God’s intention, nothing 
could stop her. Halfway to Aaron Poole’s house the Oldsmobile halted 
in a roadside ditch. 
Around the time Lone DuPres was trying to avoid the Early Melones 
sign, the men were ﬁnalizing details over coffee and something 
stronger for those who wished. None was a drinker, except Menus, but 
they did not object to lacing tonight’s coffee. Behind Sargeant’s barn-
like building, where his trade took place, beyond the paddock where 
he once kept horses, was a shed. In it he repaired tack—a hobby now, 
no longer a chargeable service—ruminated and avoided the women in 
his family. A male cozy, it was equipped with a small stove, a freezer, a 
worktable and chairs, all standing on an unruinable ﬂoor. The men 
had just begun to blow in their cups when the rain started. After a few 
swallows they joined Sargeant in the yard to move sacks and cover 
equipment with tarpaulin. When they returned, drenched, to the shed 
they found themselves lighthearted and suddenly hungry. Sargeant 
suggested beefsteaks and went in his house to get what was needed to 
feed the men. Priscilla, his wife, heard him and offered to help, but 
he sent her back to bed, ﬁrmly. The scented rainfall drummed. The 
atmosphere in the shed was braced, companionable, as the men 
ate thick steaks prepared the old-fashioned way, fried in a piping hot 
skillet. 
... 
282 Lone  
The rain’s perfume was stronger north of Ruby, especially at the 
Convent, where thick white clover and Scotch broom colonized every 
place but the garden. Mavis and Pallas, aroused from sleep by its 
aroma, rushed to tell Consolata, Grace and Seneca that the longed 
for rain had ﬁnally come. Gathered in the kitchen door, ﬁrst they 
watched, then they stuck out their hands to feel. It was like lotion on 
their ﬁngers so they entered it and let it pour like balm on their shaved 
heads and upturned faces. Consolata started it; the rest were quick to 
join her. There are great rivers in the world and on their banks and the 
edges of oceans children thrill to water. In places where rain is light 
the thrill is almost erotic. But those sensations bow to the rapture of 
holy women dancing in hot sweet rain. They would have laughed, had 
enchantment not been so deep. If there were any recollections of a 
recent warning or intimations of harm, the irresistible rain washed 
them away. Seneca embraced and ﬁnally let go of a dark morning in 
state housing. Grace witnessed the successful cleansing of a white shirt 
that never should have been stained. Mavis moved in the shudder of 
rose of Sharon petals tickling her skin. Pallas, delivered of a delicate 
son, held him close while the rain rinsed away a scary woman on an 
escalator and all fear of black water. Consolata, fully housed by the god 
who sought her out in the garden, was the more furious dancer, Mavis 
the most elegant. Seneca and Grace danced together, then parted to 
skip through fresh mud. Pallas, smoothing raindrops from her baby’s 
head, swayed like a frond. 
Finally out of the ditch, Lone naturally sought out a DuPres. She had 
been reared in that family, rescued, then taught by one of the daugh -
ters. More than that, she knew what they were made of. Pious DuPres, 
son of Booker DuPres and nephew to the famous Juvenal DuPres, was 
her ﬁrst choice. Like the Morgans and Blackhorses, they were pleased 
to be descendants of men who had governed in statehouses, but unlike 
them, they were prouder of earlier generations: artisans, gunsmiths, 
seamstresses, lacemakers, cobblers, ironmongers, masons whose seri -
ous work was stolen from them by white immigrants. Their deeper 
283 P ARADISE  
reverence was for the generations that had seen their shops burned 
and their supplies thrown overboard. Because white immigrants could 
not trust or survive fair competition, their people had been arrested, 
threatened, purged and eliminated from skilled labor and craft. But 
the families held on to what they could and what they had gained 
from 1755, when the ﬁrst DuPres carried a white napkin over his 
arm and a prayer book in his pocket. The belief that steadied them was 
not grim. Virtue, unexpected goodness, made them smile. Deliberate 
righteousness lifted their hearts as little else could. They did not always 
know what it was, but they spent a lot of time trying to ﬁnd out. Long 
before Juvenal was elected to the statehouse, supper conversation at 
a DuPres table focused on the problems each member was having, 
how each and all could handle or help. And always the turn was on 
the ethics of a deed, the clarity of motives, whether a behavior 
advanced His glory and kept His trust. None of the current DuPreses 
liked or approved of the Convent women, but that was way beside the 
point. The actions of Brood and Apollo had insulted them; Wis -
dom Poole was brother to their daughter-in-law, and in his participa -
tion in a group intent on hurting women—for whatever reason—they 
would quickly see the monster’s handiwork. And so they did. When 
Lone told them all she had heard and what she knew, Pious wasted no 
time. He instructed his wife, Melinda, to get over to the Beauchamps’ 
place; tell Ren and Luther to meet him. He and Lone would get 
to Deed Sands and Aaron Poole. Melinda said they ought to notify 
Dovey, but they could not agree on how to do that if Steward was 
there. Lone didn’t know if they had already started for the Convent 
or were waiting for sunrise but said someone should risk it and in -
form Dovey, who could, if she wanted to, let Soane know what was 
going on. 
Tired from their night dance but happy, the women return to the 
house. Drying themselves, they ask Consolata to tell them again about 
Piedade, while they oil their heads with wintergreen. 
“We sat on the shorewalk. She bathed me in emerald water. Her 
voice made proud women weep in the streets. Coins fell from the ﬁn -
284 Lone  
gers of artists and policemen, and the country’s greatest chefs begged 
us to eat their food. Piedade had songs that could still a wave, make it 
pause in its curl listening to language it had not heard since the sea 
opened. Shepherds with colored birds on their shoulders came down 
from mountains to remember their lives in her songs. Travelers 
refused to board homebound ships while she sang. At night she took 
the stars out of her hair and wrapped me in its wool. Her breath 
smelled of pineapple and cashews .... ” 
The women sleep, wake and sleep again with images of parrots, crystal 
seashells and a singing woman who never spoke. At four in the morn -
ing they wake to prepare for the day. One mixes dough while another 
lights the stove. Others gather vegetables for the noon meal, then set 
out the breakfast things. The bread, kneaded into mounds, is placed in 
baking tins to rise. 
Sunlight is yearning for brilliance when the men arrive. The stone -
washed blue of the sky is hard to break, but by the time the men park 
behind shin oak and start for the Convent, the sun has cracked 
through. Glorious blue. The water of the night rises as mist from pud -
dles and ﬂooded crevices in the road’s shoulder. When they reach the 
Convent, they avoid loud gravel crunch by weaving through tall grass 
and occasional rainbows to the front door. The claws, perhaps, snatch 
Steward out of the world. Mottled and glistening from rain, they ﬂank 
the steps. As he mounts between them, he raises his chin and then his 
riﬂe and shoots open a door that has never been locked. It slants 
inward on its hinges. Sun follows him in, splashing the walls of the 
foyer, where sexualized infants play with one another through ﬂaking 
paint. Suddenly a woman with the same white skin appears, and all 
Steward needs to see are her sensual appraising eyes to pull the trigger 
again. The other men are startled but not deterred from stepping over 
her. Fondling their weapons, feeling suddenly so young and good 
they are reminded that guns are more than decoration, intimidation or 
comfort. They are meant. 
285 P ARADISE  
Deek gives the orders. 
The men separate. 
Three women preparing food in the kitchen hear a shot. A pause. 
Another shot. Cautiously they look through the swinging door. Backed 
by light from the slanted door, shadows of armed men loom into the 
hallway. The women race to the game room and close the door, 
seconds before the men position themselves in the hall. They hear 
footsteps pass and enter the kitchen they have just left. No windows in 
the game room—the women are trapped and know it. Minutes pass. 
Arnold and Jeff Fleetwood leave the kitchen and notice a trace of 
wintergreen in the air. They open the game room door. An alabaster 
ashtray slams into Arnold’s temple, exhilarating the woman wielding 
it. She continues to smash until he is down on all fours, while Jeff, 
taken off guard, aims his gun a tick too late. It ﬂies from his hand when 
a cue stick cracks his wrist and then, on upswing, rams into his jaw. He 
raises his arm, ﬁrst for protection, then to snatch the point of the cue 
when the frame of Catherine of Siena breaks over his head. 
The women run into the hall, but freeze when they see two ﬁgures 
exit the chapel. As they run back to the kitchen, Harper and Menus are 
close behind. Harper grabs the waist and arm of one. She is a handful, 
so he doesn’t see the skillet swinging into his skull. He falls, dropping 
his gun. Menus, struggling to handcuff the wrists of another, turns 
when his father goes down. The stock that drenches his face is so hot 
he can’t yell. He drops to one knee and a woman’s hand reaches for 
the gun spinning on the ﬂoor. Hurt, half blinded, he yanks her left 
ankle. She crashes kicking at his head with her right foot. Behind him 
a woman aims a butcher knife and plunges it so deep in the shoulder 
bone she can’t remove it for a second strike. She leaves it there and 
escapes into the yard with the other two, scattering fowl as they go. 
Coming from the second ﬂoor, Wisdom Poole and Sargeant 
Person see no one. They enter the schoolroom where light pours 
through the windows. They search behind desks pushed to the wall 
even though it is clear nobody, even a child, is small enough to hide 
there. 
286 Lone  
Down below under long slow beams of a Black & Decker, Stew -
ard, Deek and K.D. observe deﬁlement and violence and perversions 
beyond imagination. Lovingly drawn ﬁlth carpets the stone ﬂoor. K.D. 
ﬁngers his palm cross. Deek taps his shirt pocket where sunglasses are 
tucked. He had thought he might use them for other purposes, but 
he wonders if he needs them now to shield from his sight this sea of 
depravity beckoning below. None dares step on it. More than justiﬁed 
in their expectations, they turn around and climb the stairs. The 
schoolroom door is wide open; Sargeant and Wisdom motion them 
in. Bunched at the windows, all ﬁve understand: the women are not 
hiding. They are loose. 
Shortly after the men have left Sargeant’s place, the citizens of Ruby 
arrive at the Oven. The rain is slowing. The trash barrel swirls with 
debris. The stream has crested but doesn’t overﬂow its banks. It seeps 
underground instead. Rain cascading off the Oven’s head meets mud 
speckled with grout ﬂakes washed away from bricks. The Oven shifts, 
just slightly, on one side. The impacted ground on which it rests is 
undermined. In trucks and cars the citizens go to meet the men. 
Neither of the sisters needs persuading, for both have known 
something awful was happening. Dovey asks Soane to drive. Each is 
silent with loud, rocketing thoughts. Dovey has watched her husband 
destroy something in himself for thirty years. The more he gained, the 
less he became. Now he may be ruining everything. Had twenty-ﬁve 
years of rampant success confused him? Did he think that because 
they lived away from white law they were beyond it? Of course, no one 
could ask for a more doting husband and as long as she ignored the 
unknowable parts, their marriage seemed perfect. Still, she misses the 
little foreclosed house where her Friend visited. Only once since K.D. 
took it over has he come to her and that was in a dream where he was 
moving away from her. She called; he turned. Next thing she knew, 
she was washing his hair. She woke, puzzled, but pleased to see that 
her hands were wet from the suds. 
Soane is chastising herself for not having talked, just talked, 
to Deek. Told him she knew about Connie; that the loss of their 
287 P ARADISE  
third child was a judgment against her—not him. After Connie saved 
Scout’s life, Soane’s resentment against her evaporated and, because 
the two of them had become fast friends, she believed she had for -
given Deek also. Now she wondered whether her fear of suffocating in 
air too thin for breathing, her unrelieved mourning for her sons, keep -
ing the ache alive by refusing to read their last letters were ways of 
punishing him without seeming to. In any case, she was certain that 
routing the Convent women had something to do with their marriage. 
Harper, Sargeant and certainly Arnold wouldn’t lift a hand to those 
women if Deek and Steward had not authorized and manipulated 
them. If only she had talked twenty-two years ago. Just talked. 
“What do you think?” Dovey broke the silence. 
“I can’t.” 
“They wouldn’t hurt them, would they?” 
Soane cut off the wipers. There was no need for them now. “No,” 
she answered. “Just scare them. Into leaving, I mean.” 
“People talk about them all the time, though. Like they were . . . 
slime.” 
“They’re different is all.” 
“I know, but that’s been enough before.” 
“These are women, Dovey. Just women.” 
“Whores, though, and strange too.” 
“Dovey!” 
“That’s what Steward says, and if he believes it—” 
“I don’t care if they’re—” Soane couldn’t imagine worse. Both 
became quiet. 
“Lone said K.D. is out there.” 
“He would be.” 
“You think Mable knows? Or Priscilla?” asks Dovey. 
“Doubt it. Hadn’t been for Lone, would we?” 
“It’ll be all right, I guess. Aaron and Pious will stop them. And the 
Beauchamps. Even Steward won’t mess with Luther.” 
The sisters laughed then, small hopeful laughs, soothing them -
selves as they sped through glorious dawn air. 
... 
288 Lone  
Consolata wakes. Seconds earlier she thought she heard footsteps 
descending. She assumed it was Pallas coming to nurse the baby lying 
beside her. She touches the diaper to see if a change is needed. Some -
thing. Something. Consolata goes chill. Opening the door she hears 
retreating steps too heavy, too many for a woman. She considers 
whether or not to disturb the baby’s sleep. Then, quickly slipping on a 
dress, blue with a white collar, she decides to leave the child on the 
cot. She climbs the stairs and sees immediately a shape lying in the 
foyer. She runs to it and cradles the woman in her arms, smearing her 
cheek and the left side of her dress with blood. The pulse at the neck is 
there but not strong; the breathing is shallow. Consolata rubs the fuzz 
on the woman’s head and begins to step in, deep, deeper to ﬁnd the 
pinpoint of light. Shots ring from the next room. 
Men are ﬁring through the window at three women running 
through clover and Scotch broom. Consolata enters, bellowing, “No!” 
The men turn. 
Consolata narrows her gaze against the sun, then lifts it as though 
distracted by something high above the heads of the men. “You’re 
back,” she says, and smiles. 
Deacon Morgan needs the sunglasses, but they are nestled in his 
shirt pocket. He looks at Consolata and sees in her eyes what has been 
drained from them and from himself as well. There is blood near her 
lips. It takes his breath away. He lifts his hand to halt his brother’s and 
discovers who, between them, is the stronger man. The bullet enters 
her forehead. 
Dovey is screaming. Soane is staring. 
“This dying may take a while.” Lone is desperate for Doublemint as 
she stanches the white woman’s wound. She and Ren have carried her 
to the sofa in the game room. Lone can’t hear a heartbeat, and 
although the neck pulse seems still to be there, too much blood has 
left this woman with wrists small as a child’s. 
“Has anybody gone for Roger?” she shouts. 
“Yes,” somebody shouts back. 
The noise outside the room is giving her a headache along with a 
289 P ARADISE  
ﬁerce desire to chew. Lone leaves the woman to see what is being done 
to salvage a life or two from the mess. 
Dovey is weeping on the stairs. 
“Dovey, you have to shut up now. I need a thinking woman. Come 
in here and get some water; try to get that girl in there to drink it.” She 
drags her toward the kitchen where Soane is. 
Earlier, Deacon Morgan had carried Consolata into the kitchen, 
holding her in his arms for the time it took the women to clear the 
table. He laid her down carefully, as though any rough gesture might 
hurt her. It was after Consolata was comfortable—Soane’s raincoat 
folded under her head—that his hands trembled. Then he left to help 
with the wounded men. Menus, unable to get the knife from his shoul -
der, was whinnying in pain. Harper’s head was swelling, but it was 
Arnold Fleetwood who seemed to be suffering a concussion. And Jeff’s 
broken jaw and cracked wrist needed attention. Other Ruby people, 
stirred by the ﬁrst caravan, had arrived, increasing twofold the disorder 
and the din. Reverend Pulliam removed the knife from Menus’ shoul -
der and had great difﬁculty trying to get both Jury men and the Fleet-
woods to agree to go to the Demby hospital. A message came from 
Deed Sands’ son that Roger’s return from Middleton was expected this 
morning, and soon as he got back his daughter would send him along. 
Pulliam was ﬁnally persuasive and drove the hurt men away. 
Male voices continued to boom. Between loud accusations and 
sullen if quieter defense, under the onslaught of questions and prophe -
cies of doom, it was a half hour or so before anyone thought to ask what 
had happened to the other women. When Pious did, Sargeant indi -
cated “out there” with a head motion. 
“Run off? To the sheriff?” 
“Doubt that.” 
“What, man?” 
“They went down. In the grass.” 
“You all massacred those women? For what?” 
“Now we got white law on us as well as damnation!” 
“We didn’t come here to kill anybody. Look what they did to 
Menus and Fleet. It was self-defense!” 
Aaron Poole looked at K.D. who had offered that explanation. 
290 Lone  
“You come in their house and don’t expect them to ﬁght you?” The 
contempt in his eyes was clear but not as chilling as Luther’s. 
“Who had the guns?” asked Luther. 
“We all did, but it was Uncle Steward who—” 
Steward slapped him full in the mouth, and had it not been for 
Simon Cary, another massacre might have taken place. “Hold that 
man!” shouted Reverend Cary and, pointing to K.D., “You in trou -
ble, son.” 
Pious banged his ﬁst on the wall. “You have already dishonored us. 
Now you going to destroy us? What manner of evil is in you?” He had 
been looking at Steward, but now his gaze took in Wisdom, Sargeant 
and the other two. 
“The evil is in this house,” said Steward. “Go down in that cellar 
and see for yourself.” 
“My brother is lying. This is our doing. Ours alone. And we bear 
the responsibility.” 
For the ﬁrst time in twenty-one years the twins looked each other 
dead in the eyes. 
Meanwhile Soane and Lone DuPres close the two pale eyes but 
can do nothing about the third one, wet and lidless, in between. 
“She said, ‘Divine,’ ” Soane whispers. 
“What?” Lone is trying to organize a sheet to cover the body. 
“When I went to her. Right after Stewar d...I held her head and 
she said, ‘Divine.’ Then something like ‘He’s divine he’s sleeping 
divine.’ Dreaming, I guess.” 
“Well, she was shot in the head, Soane.” 
“What do you think she saw?” 
“I don’t know, but it’s a sweet thought even if it was her last.” 
Dovey comes in, saying, “She’s gone.” 
“You sure?” asks Lone. 
“Go look for yourself.” 
“I will.” 
The sisters cover Consolata with the sheet. 
“I didn’t know her as well as you,” Dovey says. 
“I loved her. As God is my witness I did, but nobody knew her 
really.” 
291 P ARADISE  
“Why did they do it?” 
“They? You mean ‘he,’ don’t you? Steward killed her. Not Deek.” 
“You make it sound as though it’s all his fault.” 
“I didn’t mean to.” 
“Then what? What did you mean?” 
Soane does not know what she means, other than how to locate 
a sliver of soap to clean away any little taint she can. But it is an 
exchange that alters their relationship irrevocably. 
Bewildered, angry, sad, frightened people pile into cars, making their 
way back to children, livestock, ﬁelds, household chores and uncer -
tainty. How hard they had worked for this place; how far away they 
once were from the terribleness they have just witnessed. How could 
so clean and blessed a mission devour itself and become the world they 
had escaped? 
Lone has said she would stay with the bodies until Roger got there. 
Melinda asks, “How will you get back? Your car is out at our place.” 
Lone sighs. “Well, the dead don’t move. And Roger’s got a lot of 
work to do.” As the car pulls away, Lone looks back at the house. “A 
lot of work.” 
He had none. When Roger Best got back to Ruby, he didn’t even 
change his clothes. He gunned the motor of the ambulance/ hearse 
and sped to the Convent. Three women were down in the grass, he’d 
been told. One in the kitchen. Another across the hall. He searched 
everywhere. Every inch of grass, every patch of Scotch broom. The 
henhouse. The garden. Every row of corn in the ﬁeld beyond. Then 
every room: the chapel, the schoolroom. The game room was empty; 
the kitchen too—a sheet and a folded raincoat on the table the only 
sign that a body had been there. Upstairs he looked in both bathrooms, 
in all eight bedrooms. Again the kitchen, the pantry. Then he went 
down into the cellar, stepped over the ﬂoor paintings. He opened one 
door that revealed a coal bin. Behind another a small bed and a pair 
of shiny shoes on the dresser. No bodies. Nothing. Even the Cadillac 
was gone. 
292 SA VE-MARIE  “This is why we are here: in this single moment of aching 
sadness—in contemplating the short life and the unaccept -
able, incomprehensible death of a child—we conﬁrm, defer or lose 
our faith. Here in the tick tock of this moment, in this place all our 
questions, all our fear, our outrage, confusion, desolation seem to 
merge, snatch away the earth and we feel as though we are falling. 
Here, we might say, it is time to halt, to linger this one time and reject 
platitudes about sparrows falling under His eye; about the good dying 
young (this child didn’t have a choice about being good); or about 
death being the only democracy. This is the time to ask the questions 
that are really on our minds. Who could do this to a child? Who could 
permit this for a child? And why?” 
Sweetie Fleetwood wouldn’t discuss it. Her child would not be 
laid to rest on Steward Morgan’s land. It was a brand-new problem: the 
subject of burial sites had not come up in Ruby for twenty years, and 
there was astonishment as well as sadness when the task became neces -
sary. When Save-Marie, the youngest of Sweetie and Jeff’s children, 
died, people assumed the rest of them, Noah, Esther and Ming, would 
quickly follow. The ﬁrst was given a strong name for a strong son as 
well as being the name of his great-grandfather. The second was 
named Esther for the great-grandmother who loved and cared for the 
ﬁrst so selﬂessly. The third had a name Jeff insisted upon—something 
having to do with the war. This last child’s name was a request (or a 
lament): Save-Marie, and who was to say whether the call had not 
been answered. Thus the tense discussion of a formal cemetery was 
295 PARADISE  
not only because of Sweetie’s wishes and the expectation of more 
funerals, but out of a sense that, for complicated reasons, the reaper 
was no longer barred entry from Ruby. Richard Misner was therefore 
presiding over consecrated ground and launching a new institution. 
But whether to use the ad hoc cemetery on Steward’s ranch—where 
Ruby Smith lay—was a question out of the question for Sweetie. 
Under the inﬂuence of her brother, Luther, and blaming Steward for 
the trouble he got her husband and father-in-law into, she said she 
would rather do what Roger Best had done (dug a grave on his own 
property), and she couldn’t care less that twenty-three years had passed 
since that quick and poorly attended backyard burial took place. 
Most people understood why she was making such a fuss (grief 
plus blame was a heady brew) but Pat Best believed that Sweetie’s 
stubbornness was more calculated. Rejecting a Morgan offer, casting 
doubt on Morgan righteousness might squeeze some favors from Mor -
gan pockets. And if Pat’s 8-rock theory was correct, Sweetie’s vindic -
tiveness put the 8-rocks in the awkward position of deciding to have a 
real and formal cemetery in a town full of immortals. Something seis -
mic had happened since July. So here they were, under a soapy sky on 
a mild November day, gathered a mile or so beyond the last Ruby 
house, which was, of course, Morgan land, but nobody had the heart 
to tell Sweetie so. Standing among the crowd surrounding the 
bereaved Fleetwoods, Pat regained something close to stability. Ear -
lier, at the funeral service, the absence of a eulogy had made her cry. 
Now she was her familiar, dispassionately amused self. At least she 
hoped she was dispassionate, and hoped amusement was what she was 
feeling. She knew there were other views about her attitude, some of 
which Richard Misner had expressed (“Sad. Sad and cold”), but she 
was a scholar, not a romantic, and steeled herself against Misner’s 
graveside words to observe the mourners instead. 
He and Anna Flood had returned two days after the assault on the 
Convent women, and it took four days for him to learn what had hap -
pened. Pat gave him the two editions of the ofﬁcial story: One, that 
nine men had gone to talk to and persuade the Convent women to 
leave or mend their ways; there had been a ﬁght; the women took 
other shapes and disappeared into thin air. And two (the Fleetwood -
296 Save-Marie  
Jury version), that ﬁve men had gone to evict the women; that four 
others—the authors—had gone to restrain or stop them; these four 
were attacked by the women but had succeeded in driving them out, 
and they took off in their Cadillac; but unfortunately, some of the ﬁve 
had lost their heads and killed the old woman. Pat left Richard to 
choose for himself which rendition he preferred. What she withheld 
from him was her own: that nine 8-rocks murdered ﬁve harmless 
women ( a) because the women were impure (not 8-rock); ( b) because 
the women were unholy (fornicators at the least, abortionists at most); 
and ( c) because they could— which was what being an 8-rock meant to 
them and was also what the “deal” required. 
Richard didn’t believe either of the stories rapidly becoming 
gospel, and spoke to Simon Cary and Senior Pulliam, who clariﬁed 
other parts of the tale. But because neither had decided on the mean -
ing of the ending and, therefore, had not been able to formulate a 
credible, sermonizable account of it, they could not assuage Richard’s 
dissatisfaction. It was Lone who provided him with the livid details that 
several people were quick to discredit, because Lone, they said, was 
not reliable. Except for her, no one overheard the men at the Oven 
and who knew what they really said? Like the rest of the witnesses she 
arrived after the shots were ﬁred; besides, she and Dovey could be 
wrong about whether the two women in the house were dead or just 
wounded; and ﬁnally, she didn’t see anybody outside the house, living 
or dead. 
As for Lone, she became unhinged by the way the story was being 
retold; how people were changing it to make themselves look good. 
Other than Deacon Morgan, who had nothing to say, every one of the 
assaulting men had a different tale and their families and friends (who 
had been nowhere near the Convent) supported them, enhancing, 
recasting, inventing misinformation. Although the DuPreses, Beau-
champs, Sandses and Pooles backed up her version, even their reputa -
tion for precision and integrity could not prevent altered truth from 
taking hold in other quarters. If there were no victims the story of the 
crime was play for anybody’s tongue. So Lone shut up and kept what 
she felt certain of folded in her brain: God had given Ruby a second 
chance. Had made Himself so visible and unarguable a presence that 
297 PARADISE  
even the outrageously prideful (like Steward) and the uncorrectably 
stupid (like his lying nephew) ought to be able to see it. He had actu -
ally swept up and received His servants in broad daylight, for goodness’ 
sake! right before their very eyes, for Christ’s sake! Since they were 
accusing her of lying, she decided to keep quiet and watch the hand of 
God work the disbelievers and the false witnesses. Would they know 
they’d been spoken to? Or would they drift further from His ways? One 
thing, for sure: they could see the Oven; they couldn’t misread or mis -
speak that, so they had better hurry up and ﬁx its slide before it was too 
late—which it might already be, for the young people had changed its 
words again. No longer were they calling themselves Be the Furrow of 
His Brow. The grafﬁti on the hood of the Oven now was “We Are the 
Furrow of His Brow.” 
However sharp the divisions about what really took place, Pat 
knew the big and agreed-upon fact was that everyone who had been 
there left the premises certain that lawmen would be happily swarm -
ing all over town (they’d killed a white woman, after all), arresting vir -
tually all of Ruby’s businessmen. When they learned there were no 
dead to report, transport or bury, relief was so great they began to forget 
what they’d actually done or seen. Had it not been for Luther 
Beauchamp—who told the most damning story—and Pious, Deed 
Sands and Aaron—who corroborated much of Lone’s version—the 
whole thing might have been sanitized out of existence. Yet even they 
could not bring themselves to report unnatural deaths in a house with 
no bodies, which might lead to the discovery of natural deaths in an 
automobile full of bodies. Though not privy to many people’s conﬁ -
dence, Pat gathered from talks with her father, with Kate and from 
deliberate eavesdropping that four months later they were still chew -
ing the problem, asking God for guidance if they were wrong: if white 
law should, contrary to everything they knew and believed, be per -
mitted to deal with matters heretofore handled among and by them. 
The difﬁculties churned and entangled everybody: distribution of 
blame, prayers for understanding and forgiveness, arrogant self-
defense, outright lies, and a host of unanswered questions that Richard 
Misner kept putting to them. So the funeral came as a pause but not a 
conclusion. 
298 Save-Marie  
Maybe they were right about this place all along, Pat thought, 
surveying the townspeople. Maybe Ruby is lucky. No, she corrected 
herself. Although the evidence of the assault was invisible, the conse -
quences were not. There was Jeff, his arm around his wife, both look -
ing properly sorrowful but slightly majestic too, for Jeff was now sole 
owner of his father’s furniture and appliance store. Arnold, suddenly a 
very old man with a persistent headache, and enjoying his own bed -
room now that Arnette had moved out, stood with bowed head and 
roaming eyes that traveled everywhere but near the cofﬁn. Sargeant 
Person looked as smug as ever: he had no landlord expecting a ﬁeld fee 
and unless and until the county auditor got interested in a tiny hamlet 
of quiet, God-fearing black folk, his avarice would go unabated. 
Harper Jury, uncontrite, was wearing a dark blue suit and a head 
wound that, like a medal, gave him leave to assume the position of 
bloodied but unbowed warrior against evil. Menus was the most un -
fortunate. He had no customers at Anna’s anymore, in part because his 
ruined shoulder restricted his facility with barber tools but also 
because his drinking had extended itself to many more days of the 
week. His dissipation was rapidly coming to its own conclusion. Wis -
dom Poole had the toughest row to hoe. Seventy family members held 
him accountable (just as they had his brothers, Brood and Apollo) for 
scandalizing their forefathers’ reputations, giving him no peace or sta -
tus, reprimanding him daily until he fell on his knees and wept before 
the entire congregation of Holy Redeemer. After testifying, recommit -
ted, renewed and full of remorse, he began tentative conversations 
with Brood and Apollo. Arnette and K.D. were building a new house 
on Steward’s property. She was pregnant again, and they both hoped to 
get in a position to make life unpleasant for the Pooles, the DuPreses, 
the Sandses and the Beauchamps, especially Luther, who took every 
opportunity to insult K.D. The most interesting development was with 
the Morgan brothers. Their distinguishing features were eroding: 
tobacco choices (they gave up cigar and chaw at the same time), shoes, 
clothes, facial hair. Pat thought they looked more alike than they prob -
ably had at birth. But the inside difference was too deep for anyone to 
miss. Steward, insolent and unapologetic, took K.D. under his wing, 
concentrating on making the nephew and the sixteen-month-old 
299 PARADISE  
grandnephew rich (thus the new house), easing K.D. into the bank 
while waiting for Dovey to come around, which she seemed to be 
doing, because there was an obvious coolness between her and Soane. 
The sisters disagreed about what happened at the Convent. Dovey saw 
Consolata fall but maintained she did not see who pulled the trigger. 
Soane knew, and needed to know, one thing: it had not been her hus -
band. She had seen his hand moving over to Steward’s in a cautioning, 
preventing gesture. She saw it and she said it, over and over again, to 
anyone who would listen. 
It was Deacon Morgan who had changed the most. It was as 
though he had looked in his brother’s face and did not like himself 
anymore. To everyone’s surprise he had formed a friendship (well, a 
relationship anyway) with somebody other than Steward, the cause, 
reason and basis of which were a mystery. Richard Misner wasn’t talk -
ing, so all anyone knew for certain was the barefoot walk that took 
place in public. 
It was September then and still hot when Deacon Morgan walked 
toward Central. Chrysanthemums to the right, chrysanthemums to the 
left of the brick path leading from his imposing white house. He wore 
his hat, business suit, vest and a clean white shirt. No shoes. No socks. 
He entered St. John Street, where he had planted trees ﬁfty feet apart, 
so great was his optimism twenty years earlier. He turned right on Cen -
tral. It had been at least a decade since the soles of his shoes, let alone 
his bare feet, had touched that much concrete. Just past Arnold Fleet-
wood’s house, near the corner of St. Luke, a couple said, “Morning, 
Deek.” He lifted his hand in greeting, his eyes straight ahead. Lily 
Cary helloed from the porch of her house near Cross Mark but he did 
not turn his head. “Car broke down?” she asked, staring at his feet. At 
Harper Jury’s drugstore, on the corner of Central and St. Matthew, he 
felt rather than saw watchful eyes traveling alongside him. He didn’t 
turn to see nor did he glance through the window of the Morgan Sav -
ings and Loan Bank as he approached St. Peter. At Cross Peter he 
crossed and made his way to Richard Misner’s house. The last time he 
was here, six years before, he was angry, suspicious but certain he and 
his brother would prevail. What he felt now was exotic to a twin—an 
incompleteness, a mufﬂed solitude, which took away appetite, sleep 
300 Save-Marie  
and sound. Since July, other people seemed to him to be speaking in 
whispers, or shouting from long distances. Soane watched him but, 
mercifully, did not initiate dangerous dialogue. It was as though she 
understood that had she done so, what he said to her would draw the 
life from their life. He might tell her that green springtime had been 
sapped away; that outside of that loss, she was grand, more beautiful 
than he believed a woman could be; that her untamable hair framed a 
face of planes so sharp he wanted to touch; that after she spoke, the 
smile that followed made the sun look like a fool. He might tell his 
wife that he thought at ﬁrst she was speaking to him—“You’re back”— 
but knew now it wasn’t so. And that instantly he longed to know what 
she saw, but Steward, who saw nothing or everything, stopped them 
dead lest they know another realm. 
Earlier that September morning he had bathed and dressed care -
fully but could not bring himself to cover his feet. He handled the dark 
socks, the shiny black shoes for a long while, then put them aside. 
He knocked on the door and removed his hat when the younger 
man answered. 
“I need to speak to you, Reverend.” 
“Come on in.” 
Deacon Morgan had never consulted with or taken into his conﬁ -
dence any man. All of his intimate conversations had been wordless 
ones with his brother or brandishing ones with male companions. He 
spoke to his wife in the opaque manner he thought appropriate. None 
had required him to translate into speech the raw matter he exposed to 
Reverend Misner. His words came out like ingots pulled from the ﬁre 
by an apprentice blacksmith—hot, misshapen, resembling themselves 
only in their glow. He spoke of a wall in Ravenna, Italy, white in the 
late afternoon sun with wine colored shadows pressing its edge. Of two 
children on a beach offering him a shell formed like an S—how open 
their faces, how loud the bells. Of salt water burning his face on a troop 
ship. Of colored girls in slacks waving from the door of a canning fac -
tory. Then he told him of his grandfather who walked barefoot for two 
hundred miles rather than dance. 
Richard listened intently, interrupting once to offer cool water. 
Although he did not understand what Deacon was talking about, he 
301 PARADISE  
could see that the man’s life was uninhabitable. Deacon began to 
speak of a woman he had used; how he had turned up his nose at her 
because her loose and easy ways gave him the license to drop and 
despise her. That while the adultery preyed on him for a short while 
(very short), his long remorse was at having become what the Old 
Fathers cursed: the kind of man who set himself up to judge, rout and 
even destroy the needy, the defenseless, the different. 
“Who is this woman?” Richard asked him. 
Deacon did not answer. He ran his ﬁnger around the inside of his 
shirt collar, then started on another story. It seemed his grandfather, 
Zechariah, was subject to personal taunts as well as newspaper articles 
describing his malfeasance in ofﬁce. He was an embarrassment to 
Negroes and both a threat and a joke to whites. No one, black or white, 
could or would help him ﬁnd other work. He was even passed up for a 
teaching job at a poor country primary school. The Negroes in a posi -
tion to help were few (the depression of ’73 was severe), but they took 
Zechariah’s digniﬁed manner for coldness and his studied speech for 
arrogance, mockery or both. The family lost the nice house and were 
living (all nine of them) with a sister’s family. Mindy, his wife, found 
work sewing at home, and the children did odd jobs. Few knew and 
fewer remembered that Zechariah had a twin, and before he changed 
his name, they were known as Coffee and Tea. When Coffee got the 
statehouse job, Tea seemed as pleased as everybody else. And when his 
brother was thrown out of ofﬁce, he was equally affronted and humili -
ated. One day, years later, when he and his twin were walking near a 
saloon, some whitemen, amused by the double faces, encouraged the 
brothers to dance. Since the encouragement took the form of a pistol, 
Tea, quite reasonably, accommodated the whites, even though he was 
a grown man, older than they were. Coffee took a bullet in his foot 
instead. From that moment they weren’t brothers anymore. Coffee 
began to plan a new life elsewhere. He contacted other men, other for -
mer legislators who had the same misfortune as his—Juvenal DuPres 
and Drum Blackhorse. They were the three who formed the nucleus 
of the Old Fathers. Needless to say, Coffee didn’t ask Tea to join them 
on their journey to Oklahoma. 
302 Save-Marie  
“I always thought Coffee—Big Papa—was wrong,” said Deacon 
Morgan. “Wrong in what he did to his brother. Tea was his twin, after 
all. Now I’m less sure. I’m thinking Coffee was right because he saw 
something in Tea that wasn’t just going along with some drunken 
whiteboys. He saw something that shamed him. The way his brother 
thought about things; the choices he made when up against it. Coffee 
couldn’t take it. Not because he was ashamed of his twin, but because 
the shame was in himself. It scared him. So he went off and never 
spoke to his brother again. Not one word. Know what I mean?” 
“It must have been hard,” said Richard. 
“I’m saying he never said another word to him and wouldn’t allow 
anybody else to call his name.” 
“Lack of words,” Richard said. “Lack of forgiveness. Lack of love. 
To lose a brother is a hard thing. To choose to lose one, well, that’s 
worse than the original shame, wouldn’t you say?” 
Deacon looked down at his feet for a long time. Richard stayed 
quiet with him. Finally he raised his head and said: 
“I got a long way to go, Reverend.” 
“You’ll make it,” said Richard Misner. “No doubt about it.” 
Richard and Anna doubted the convenient mass disappearance of the 
victims and, as soon as they got back, went to look for themselves. 
Other than a sparkling white crib in a bedroom with the word divine 
taped to the door, and foodstuffs, there was nothing recently lived-in 
about the place. The chickens were wilding or half eaten by four-
footed prowlers. Pepper bushes were in full ﬂower, but the rest of the 
garden was lost. Sargeant’s cornﬁeld the only human touch. Richard 
barely glanced at the cellar ﬂoor. Anna, however, examining it as 
closely as her lamp permitted, saw the terribleness K.D. reported, but 
it wasn’t the pornography he had seen, nor was it Satan’s scrawl. She 
saw instead the turbulence of females trying to bridle, without being 
trampled, the monsters that slavered them. 
They left the house and stood in the yard. 
“Listen,” Anna told him. “One of them or maybe more wasn’t 
303 PARADISE  
dead. Nobody actually looked—they just assumed. Then, between the 
time folks left and Roger arrived, they got the hell out of there. Taking 
the killed ones with them. Simple, right?” 
“Right,” said Misner, but he didn’t sound convinced. 
“It’s been weeks now, and nobody has come around asking ques -
tions. They must not have reported it, so why should we?” 
“Whose baby was in there? That crib is new.” 
“I don’t know, but it sure wasn’t Arnette’s.” 
He said it again, “Right,” with the same level of doubt. Then, “I 
don’t like mysteries.” 
“You’re a preacher. Your whole life’s belief is a mystery.” 
“Belief is mysterious; faith is mysterious. But God is not a mystery. 
We are.” 
“Oh, Richard,” she said as though it was all too much. 
He had asked her to marry him. “Will you marry me, Anna?” 
“Oh, I don’t know.” 
“Why not?” 
“Your ﬁre’s too stingy.” 
“Not when it counts.” 
She had never expected to be that happy and coming back to 
Ruby, instead of making the great announcement, they were sorting 
out what looked like the total collapse of a town. 
“Should we take those chickens? They’ll all be eaten anyway.” 
“If you want to,” he said. 
“I don’t. I’ll just see if there’re any eggs.” Anna entered the hen -
house wrinkling her nose and stepping through a half inch of chicken 
litter. She fought a couple of them to get the ﬁve eggs that she thought 
were probably fresh. When she came out, both hands full, she called, 
“Richard? Got something I can put these in?” At the edge of the gar -
den a faded red chair lay on its side. Beyond was blossom and death. 
Shriveled tomato plants alongside crops of leafy green reseeding them -
selves with golden ﬂowers; pink hollyhocks so tall the heads leaned all 
the way over a trail of bright squash blossoms; lacy tops of carrots 
browned and lifeless next to straight green spikes of onion. Melons 
split their readiness showing gums of juicy red. Anna sighed at the mix 
304 Save-Marie  
of neglect and unconquerable growth. The ﬁve eggs warm umber in 
her hands. 
Richard came toward her. “This big enough?” He ﬂicked open his 
handkerchief. 
“Maybe. Here, hold them while I see if the peppers are out.” 
“No,” he said. “I’ll go.” He dropped the handkerchief over the 
eggs. 
It was when he returned, as they stood near the chair, her hands 
balancing brown eggs and white cloth, his ﬁngers looking doubled 
with long pepper pods—green, red and plum black—that they saw it. 
Or sensed it, rather, for there was nothing to see. A door, she said later. 
“No, a window,” he said, laughing. “That’s the difference between us. 
You see a door; I see a window.” 
Anna laughed too. They expanded on the subject: What did a door 
mean? what a window? focusing on the sign rather than the event; 
excited by the invitation rather than the party. They knew it was there. 
Knew it so well they were transﬁxed for a long moment before they 
backed away and ran to the car. The eggs and peppers lay in the rear 
seat; the air conditioner lifted her collar. And they laughed some more 
as they drove along, trading pleasant insults about who was a pessimist, 
who an optimist. Who saw a closed door; who saw a raised window. 
Anything to avoid reliving the shiver or saying out loud what they were 
wondering. Whether through a door needing to be opened or a beck -
oning window already raised, what would happen if you entered? 
What would be on the other side? What on earth would it be? What 
on earth? 
Reverend Misner had everyone’s attention and just a few words more 
to offer. His glance focused on the culpable men, seven of whom, with 
some primitive instinct for protection, clustered together, away, it 
seemed from the other mourners. Sargeant, Harper, Menus, Arnold, 
Jeff, K.D., Steward. Wisdom was closest to his own family; and Dea -
con was not there at all. Richard’s thoughts about these men were not 
generous. Whether they be the ﬁrst or the last, representing the oldest 
305 PARADISE  
black families or the newest, the best of the tradition or the most 
pathetic, they had ended up betraying it all. They think they have out -
foxed the whiteman when in fact they imitate him. They think they 
are protecting their wives and children, when in fact they are maiming 
them. And when the maimed children ask for help, they look else -
where for the cause. Born out of an old hatred, one that began when 
one kind of black man scorned another kind and that kind took the 
hatred to another level, their selﬁshness had trashed two hundred years 
of suffering and triumph in a moment of such pomposity and error 
and callousness it froze the mind. Unbridled by Scripture, deafened 
by the roar of its own history, Ruby, it seemed to him, was an unneces -
sary failure. How exquisitely human was the wish for permanent hap -
piness, and how thin human imagination became trying to achieve it. 
Soon Ruby will be like any other country town: the young thinking of 
elsewhere; the old full of regret. The sermons will be eloquent but 
fewer and fewer will pay attention or connect them to everyday life. 
How can they hold it together, he wondered, this hard-won heaven 
deﬁned only by the absence of the unsaved, the unworthy and the 
strange? Who will protect them from their leaders? 
Suddenly Richard Misner knew he would stay. Not only because 
Anna wanted to, or because Deek Morgan had sought him out for a 
confession of sorts, but also because there was no better battle to ﬁght, 
no better place to be than among these outrageously beautiful, ﬂawed 
and proud people. Besides, mortality may be new to them but birth 
was not. The future panted at the gate. Roger Best will get his gas sta -
tion and the connecting roads will be laid. Outsiders will come and 
go, come and go and some will want a sandwich and a can of 3.2 beer. 
So who knows, maybe there will be a diner too. K.D. and Steward will 
already be discussing TV. It was inappropriate to smile at a funeral, so 
Misner envisioned the little girl whose destroyed hands he had once 
been permitted to hold. It helped him recover his line of thought. The 
questions he had asked in the mourners’ stead needed an answer. 
“May I suggest those are not the important questions. Or rather 
those are the questions of anguish but not of intelligence. And God, 
being intelligence itself, generosity itself, has given us Mind to know 
306 Save-Marie  
His subtlety. To know His elegance. His purity. To know that ‘what is 
sown is not alive until it dies.’ ” 
The wind picked up a bit but not enough to make anyone uncom -
fortable. Misner was losing them; they stood before the open grave 
closed to everything but their own musings. Funeral thoughts were 
mingled with plans for Thanksgiving, evaluations of their neighbors, 
the chitty-chat of daily life. Misner repressed a sigh before concluding 
his remarks with prayer. But when he bowed his head and gazed at the 
cofﬁn lid he saw the window in the garden, felt it beckon toward 
another place—neither life nor death—but there, just yonder, shaping 
thoughts he did not know he had. 
“Wait. Wait.” He was shouting. “Do you think this was a short, 
pitiful life bereft of worth because it did not parallel your own? Let me 
tell you something. The love she received was wide and deep, and the 
care given her was gentle and unrelenting, and that love and care 
enveloped her so completely that the dreams, the visions she had, the 
journeys she took made her life as compelling, as rich, as valuable as 
any of ours and probably more blessed. It is our own misfortune if we 
do not know in our long life what she knew every day of her short one: 
that although life in life is terminal and life after life is everlasting, He 
is with us always, in life, after it and especially in between, lying in wait 
for us to know the splendor.” He stopped, disturbed by what he had 
said and how. Then, as if to apologize to the little girl, he spoke softly, 
directly to her. 
“Oh, Save-Marie, your name always sounded like ‘Save me.’ ‘Save 
me.’ Any other messages hiding in your name? I know one that shines 
out for all to see: there never was a time when you were not saved, 
Marie. Amen.” 
His words embarrassed him a little, but on that day, nothing had 
ever been clearer. 
Billie Delia walked slowly away from the other mourners. She had 
stood with her mother and grandfather and smiled encouragingly at 
Arnette, but now she wanted to be alone. This was her ﬁrst funeral, 
307 PARADISE  
and she thought about it in terms of how expansive it made her grand -
father to have his skills needed. More on her mind was the absence 
of the women she had liked. They had treated her so well, had not 
embarrassed her with sympathy, had just given her sunny kindness. 
Looking at her bruised face and swollen eyes, they sliced cucumber for 
her lids after making her drink a glass of wine. No one insisted on hear -
ing what drove her there, but she could tell they would listen if she 
wanted them to. The one called Mavis was the nicest and the funniest 
was Gigi. Billie Delia was perhaps the only one in town who was not 
puzzled by where the women were or concerned about how they dis -
appeared. She had another question: When will they return? When 
will they reappear, with blazing eyes, war paint and huge hands to rip 
up and stomp down this prison calling itself a town. A town that had 
tried to ruin her grandfather, succeeded in swallowing her mother and 
almost broken her own self. A backward noplace ruled by men whose 
power to control was out of control and who had the nerve to say 
who could live and who not and where; who had seen in lively, free, 
unarmed females the mutiny of the mares and so got rid of them. She 
hoped with all her heart that the women were out there, darkly bur -
nished, biding their time, brass-metaling their nails, ﬁling their 
incisors—but out there. Which is to say she hoped for a miracle. Not 
so unreasonable a wish since a minimiracle had already occurred: 
Brood and Apollo had reconciled, agreeing to wait for her to make up 
her mind. She knew, as they did, that she never could and that the 
threesome would end only when they did. The Convent women 
would roar at that. She could see their pointy teeth. 
308 The reprieve took years but it came. Manley Gibson would die in 
a ward with others like himself rather than strapped to a chair 
with no kin looking on. It was a good thing. A great thing. He got to 
go outside and now he was part of the work crew at the lake road. The 
lake was so blue. The Kentucky Fried Chicken lunch so ﬁne. Maybe 
he could run. Some joke. A ﬁfty-two-year-old lifer on the run. Where 
to? To who? He had been in since 1961, leaving behind an eleven-
year-old who didn’t write anymore, and the only photograph he had of 
her was when she was thirteen. 
Lunchtime was special. They sat near the lake in full sight of the 
guards but near the water anyway. Manley wiped his hands on the lit -
tle paper napkins. To his left, near a couple of trees, a young woman 
spread two blankets on the grass, a radio in between. Manley turned to 
see what the crew thought of this: a civilian (and a female, too) right in 
their midst. Armed guards strolled the road above them. None gave 
sign that they saw her. 
She turned on the radio and stood up, revealing a face he’d know 
anywhere. For the life of him he couldn’t help it. “Gigi!” he hissed. 
The girl looked his way. Manley, restraining himself, sauntered 
over to the trees, hoping the guards would think he was taking a leak. 
“Am I right? Is it you?” 
“Daddy Man?” At least she looked pleased to see him. 
“It is you! Goddamn, I knew it. What you doing here? You knew I 
was reprieved?” 
“No, I didn’t know nothing about it.” 
309 PARADISE  
“Well, look here, I don’t get out or nothing, but I ain’t on the row 
no more.” Manley turned to see if others had noticed them. “Keep 
your voice down,” he whispered. “So what you doing here?” He 
noticed her clothes for the ﬁrst time. “You in the army?” 
Gigi smiled. “Sort of.” 
“Sort of? You mean you was?” 
“Oh, Daddy Man, anybody can buy this stuff.” Gigi laughed. 
“Gimme your address, honey. I wanna write and tell you every -
thing. Hear from your mother? Her old man still alive?” He was rush -
ing; the lunch whistle was due to sound any minute. 
“I don’t have an address yet.” Gigi lifted her cap and replaced it. 
“No? Well, uh, you write me, okay? Care of the prison. I’ll put you 
on the list tomorrow. I can get two a month—” 
The whistle blew. “Two,” Manley repeated. Then, “Say, you still 
got that locket I give you?” 
“I got it.” 
“Ooh, honey, oh, honey, my little girl.” He reached out to touch 
her but stopped, saying, “I gotta go. They’ll demerit me. Care of the 
prison, hear? Two a month.” He backed away, still looking at her. “Will 
I hear from you?” 
Gigi straightened her cap. “You will, Daddy Man. You will.” 
Later, as Manley sat on the bus, he went over every detail of 
what he had seen of his daughter. Her army cap and fatigue pants— 
camouﬂage colors. Heavy army boots, black T-shirt. And now that he 
thought of it, he could swear she was packing. He looked toward the 
lake, darkening in a lower but prettier sun. 
Gigi took off her clothes. The nights were chilling the lake, making it 
harder and harder for the sun to warm it the next day. In this part of the 
lake it was okay to swim nude. This was lake country: viridian water, 
upright trees and—in places where no boats or ﬁshermen came—a 
privacy royals would envy. She picked up a towel and dried her hair. 
Less than an inch had grown, but she loved how wind and water and 
ﬁngers and toes rippled in it. She opened a bottle of aloe and began to 
310 Save-Marie  
rub her skin. Then, straightening the towel next to her, she looked 
toward the lake where her companion was just coming ashore. 
The ﬁfteenth painting, like the ﬁrst, needed more. Trying to remem -
ber the chin had frustrated Dee Dee in her ﬁrst attempt, but when she 
decided to skip the jawline and just shadow the lower part of her 
daughter’s face, she found the eyes all wrong. Canvas ﬁfteen got it bet -
ter, but still something was missing. The head was ﬁne, but the body, 
bleak and uninteresting, seemed to need another shape—at the hip or 
elbow. Never having experienced a compulsion that was not sensual, 
she was puzzled by the energy she could summon at will to freshen or 
begin the ﬁgure anew. The eyes kept coming up accusatory; the skin 
tone eluded her; and the hair was invariably a hat. 
Dee Dee sat down on the ﬂoor, rolling the brush handle in her ﬁn -
gers while she examined the work she had done. With a long puff of air 
she got up and went into the living room. It was when she had taken 
the ﬁrst sip of the margarita that she saw her coming across the yard, a 
knapsack or something tied to her chest. But she had no hair. No hair 
at all and a baby’s head lay just under her chin. As she came closer, 
Dee Dee could see two fat legs, round as doughnuts, poking out of the 
knapsack thing on its mother’s chest. She put down the margarita and 
pressed her face to the picture window. No mistake. It was Pallas. One 
hand on the knapsack bottom, the other carrying a sword. A sword? 
The smile on Pallas’ face was beatiﬁc. And her dress—rose madder 
and umber—swirled about her ankles with every step. Dee Dee waved 
and called out her name. Or tried to. While she thought “Pallas,” 
formed it in her mind, it came out different, like “urg,” then “neh 
neh.” Something was wrong with her tongue. Pallas was moving 
quickly but not coming toward the front door. She was moving past the 
house, to the side. Dee Dee, in a panic, ran into the studio, grabbed 
the ﬁfteenth canvas and rushed to the patio, holding it up and shout -
ing, “Urg. Urg. Neh!” Pallas turned, narrowed her eyes and paused as 
if trying to determine where the sound came from, then, failing, con -
tinued on her way. Dee Dee stopped, thinking maybe it was someone 
311 PARADISE  
else. But with or without hair, that was her face, wasn’t it? She of all 
people knew her own daughter’s face, didn’t she? As well as she knew 
her own. 
Dee Dee saw Pallas a second time. In the guest bedroom (where 
Carlos—the motherfucker—used to sleep), Pallas was searching un -
der the bed. As Dee Dee watched, not daring to speak in case the glug 
sound came out of her mouth, Pallas raised up. With a satisﬁed grunt, 
she held aloft a pair of shoes she’d left there on her last, and ﬁrst, visit. 
Huaraches, but expensive leather ones, not that plastic or straw stuff. 
Pallas didn’t turn; she left through the sliding glass door. Dee Dee 
followed and saw her get into a beat-up car waiting on the road. Other 
people were in the car but the sun was setting so Dee Dee couldn’t tell 
if they were men or women. They drove off into a violet so ultra it 
broke her heart. 
Sally Albright, walking north on Calumet, stopped suddenly in front 
of the plate-glass window of Jennie’s Country Inn. She was sure, almost 
sure, that the woman sitting by herself at a table for four was her 
mother. Sally moved closer to peep under the woman’s straw hat. She 
couldn’t quite see the face but the ﬁngernails, the hands holding the 
menu were indisputable. She went inside the restaurant. A lady near 
the cash register said, “May I help you?” Everyplace Sally went now, 
she gave folks pause. All because of her hair color. “No,” she told the 
lady. “I’m looking for a—Oh, there she is,” and, faking assuredness, 
sauntered over to the table for four. If she was wrong, she’d say, “’Scuse 
me, I thought you was somebody else.” She slipped into a chair and 
looked closely at the woman’s face. 
“Mom?” 
Mavis looked up. “Oh, my,” she said, smiling. “Look at you.” 
“I wasn’t sure, the hat and all, but God, look, it is you.” 
Mavis laughed. 
“Oh, man. I knew it. God, Mom, it’s bee n . . . yea rs!” 
“I know. Have you eaten?” 
“Yeah. Just ﬁnished. I’m on my lunch hour. I work at—” 
The waitress raised her order pad. “Have you all decided yet?” 
312 Save-Marie  
“Yes,” said Mavis. “Orange juice, double grits and two eggs over 
medium.” 
“Bacon?” asked the waitress. 
“No, thanks.” 
“We got good sausage—link and patty.” 
“No, thanks. You serve gravy with the biscuits?” 
“Sure do. Poured or on the side?” 
“On the side, please.” 
“Sure thing. And you?” She turned to Sally. 
“Just coffee.” 
“Oh, come on,” said Mavis. “Have something. My treat.” 
“I don’t want anything.” 
“You sure?” 
“Yeah, I’m sure.” 
The waitress left. Mavis lined up the place mat and ﬂatware. 
“That’s what I like about this place. They let you choose. Gravy 
poured or on the side, see?” 
“Mom! I don’t want to talk about food.” Sally felt as though her 
mother was sliding away, acting like their seeing each other wasn’t 
important. 
“Well, you never did have much of an appetite.” 
“Where’ve you been?” 
“Well, I couldn’t come back, could I?” 
“You mean that warrant stuff?” 
“I mean everything. How about you? You been all right?” 
“Mostly. Frankie’s ﬁne. Gets all A’s. But Billy James ain’t so hot.” 
“Oh. Why?” 
“Hangs out with some real scary little shits.” 
“Oh, no.” 
“You should go see him, Ma. Talk to him.” 
“I will.” 
“Will you?” 
“Can I have my lunch ﬁrst?” Mavis laughed and removed her hat. 
“Ma. You cut your hair off.” There it was again—that slidey feel -
ing. “It looks nice, though. How you like mine?” 
“Cute.” 
313 PARADISE  
“No it ain’t. Thought I’d like blond tips, but I’m tired of it now. 
Maybe I’ll cut mine too.” 
The waitress arrived and neatly arranged the plates. Mavis salted 
her grits and swirled the pat of butter on top. She sipped her orange 
juice and said, “Ooo. Fresh.” 
It came out in a rush because she felt she had to hurry. If she was 
going to say anything, she had to hurry. “I was scared all the time, Ma. 
All the time. Even before the twins. But when you left, it got worse. 
You don’t know. I mean I was scared to fall asleep.” 
“Taste this, honey.” Mavis offered her the glass of juice. 
Sally took a quick swallow. “Daddy was—shit, I don’t know how 
you stood it. He’d get drunk and try to bother me, Ma.” 
“Oh, baby.” 
“I fought him, though. Told him the next time he passed out I was 
gonna cut his throat open. Would have, too.” 
“I’m so sorry,” said Mavis. “I didn’t know what else to do. You were 
always stronger than me.” 
“Did you never think about us?” 
“All the time. And I sneaked back to get a peep at you all.” 
“No shit?” Sally grinned. “Where?” 
“At the school, mostly. I was too scared to go by the house.” 
“You wouldn’t know it now. Daddy married a woman who kicks 
his butt if he don’t act right and keep the yard clean and stuff. She 
packs a gun, too.” 
Mavis laughed. “Good for her.” 
“But I moved out. Me and Charmaine got us a place together over 
on Auburn. She’s a—” 
“You sure you don’t want something? It’s really good, Sal.” 
Sally picked up a fork, slipped it into her mother’s plate, scooping 
up a buttery dollop of grits. When the fork was in her mouth, their eyes 
met. Sally felt the nicest thing then. Something long and deep and 
slow and bright. 
“You gonna leave again, Ma?” 
“I have to, Sal.” 
“You coming back?” 
314 Save-Marie  
“Sure.”  
“But you’ll try and talk to Billy James, won’t you? And Frankie’d  
love it. You want my address?” 
“I’ll talk to Billy and tell Frankie I love him.” 
“I’m sick and sorry about everything, Ma. I was just so scared all 
the time.” 
“Me too.” 
They were standing outside. The lunch crowd thickened with 
shoppers and their kids. 
“Gimme a hug, baby.” 
Sally put her arms around her mother’s waist and began to cry. 
“Uh uh,” said Mavis. “None of that, now.” 
Sally squeezed. 
“Ouch,” said Mavis, laughing. 
“What?” 
“Nothing. That side hurts a bit, that’s all.” 
“You okay?” 
“I’m perfect, Sal.” 
“I don’t know what you think about me, but I always loved, always, 
even when.” 
“I know that, Sal. Know it now anyway.” Mavis pushed a shank of 
black and yellow hair behind her daughter’s ear and kissed her cheek. 
“Count on me, Sal.” 
“See you again, won’t I?”  
“Bye, Sal. Bye.”  
Sally watched her mother disappear into the crowd. She ran her  
ﬁnger under her nose, then held the cheek that had been kissed. Did 
she give her the address? Where was she going? Did they pay? When 
did they pay the cashier? Sally touched her eyelids. One minute they 
were sopping biscuits; the next they were kissing in the street. 
Several years ago she had checked out the foster home and saw the 
mother—a cheerful, no-nonsense woman the kids seemed to like. So, 
ﬁne. That was it. Fine. She could go on with her life. And did. Until 
315 PARADISE  
1966, when her gaze was drawn to girls with huge chocolate eyes. 
Seneca would be older now, thirteen years old, but she checked with 
Mrs. Greer to see if she had kept in touch. 
“Who are you, again?” 
“Her cousin, Jean.” 
“Well, she was only here for a short while—a few months really.” 
“Do you know wher e . . . ?”  
“No, honey. I don’t know a thing.” 
After that she was unexpectedly distracted in malls, theater ticket 
lines, buses. In 1968 she was certain she spotted her at a Little Richard 
concert, but the press of the crowd prevented a closer look. Jean was 
discreet about this subversive search. Jack didn’t know she’d had a 
child before (at fourteen), and it was after marriage, when she had his 
child, that she began the search for the eyes. The sightings came at 
such odd moments and in such strange places—once she believed the 
girl climbing out the back of a pickup truck was her daughter—that 
when she ﬁnally bumped into her, in 1976, she wanted to call an 
ambulance. Jean and Jack were crossing the stadium parking lot under 
blazing klieg lights. A girl was standing in front of a car, blood running 
from her hands. Jean saw the blood ﬁrst and then the chocolate eyes. 
“Seneca!” she screamed, and ran toward her. As she approached 
she was intercepted by another girl, who, holding a bottle of beer and a 
cloth, began to clean away the blood. 
“Seneca?” Jean shouted over the second girl’s head. 
“Yes?” 
“What happened? It’s me!” 
“Some glass,” said the second girl. “She fell on some glass. I’m tak -
ing care of her.” 
“Jean! Come on!” Jack was several cars down. “Where the hell 
are you?” 
“Coming. Just a minute, okay?” 
The girl wiping Seneca’s hands looked up from time to time to 
frown at Jean. “Any glass get in?” she asked Seneca. 
Seneca stroked her palms, ﬁrst one, then the other. “No. I don’t 
think so.” 
“Jean! Trafﬁc’s gonna be hell, babe.” 
316 Save-Marie  
“Don’t you remember me?” 
Seneca looked up, the bright lights turning her eyes black. 
“Should I? From where?” 
“On Woodlawn. We used to live in those apartments on Wood-
lawn.” 
Seneca shook her head. “I lived on Beacon. Next to the play -
ground.” 
“But your name is Seneca, right?” 
“Yes.” 
“Well, I’m Jean.” 
“Lady, your old man’s calling you.” The girlfriend wrung out the 
cloth and poured the rest of the beer over Seneca’s hands. 
“Ow,” Seneca said to her friend. “It burns.” She waved her hands 
in the air. 
“Guess I made a mistake,” said Jean. “I thought you were someone 
I knew from Woodlawn.” 
Seneca smiled. “That’s okay. Everybody makes mistakes.” 
The friend said, “It’s ﬁne now. Look.” 
Seneca and Jean both looked. Her hands were clean, no blood. 
Just a few lines that might or might not leave marks. 
“Great!” 
“Let’s go.” 
“Well, bye.” 
“Jean!” 
“Bye.” 
Gunning the gas pedal while watching his rearview mirror, Jack 
said, “Who was that?” 
“Some girl I thought I knew from before. When I lived in those 
apartments on Woodlawn. The housing project there.” 
“What housing project?” 
“On Woodlawn.” 
“Never any projects on Woodlawn,” said Jack. “That was Beacon. 
Torn down now, but it was never on Woodlawn. Beacon is where it 
was. Right next to the old playground.” 
“You sure about that?” 
“Sure I’m sure. You losing it, woman.” 
317 PARADISE  
... 
In ocean hush a woman black as ﬁrewood is singing. Next to her is a 
younger woman whose head rests on the singing woman’s lap. Ruined 
ﬁngers troll the tea brown hair. All the colors of seashells—wheat, 
roses, pearl—fuse in the younger woman’s face. Her emerald eyes 
adore the black face framed in cerulean blue. Around them on the 
beach, sea trash gleams. Discarded bottle caps sparkle near a broken 
sandal. A small dead radio plays the quiet surf. 
There is nothing to beat this solace which is what Piedade’s song is 
about, although the words evoke memories neither one has ever had: 
of reaching age in the company of the other; of speech shared and 
divided bread smoking from the ﬁre; the unambivalent bliss of going 
home to be at home—the ease of coming back to love begun. 
When the ocean heaves sending rhythms of water ashore, Piedade 
looks to see what has come. Another ship, perhaps, but different, 
heading to port, crew and passengers, lost and saved, atremble, for they 
have been disconsolate for some time. Now they will rest before 
shouldering the endless work they were created to do down here in 
paradise. 
318 A Note About the Author 
Toni Mor r ison is the Rober t F. Goheen Pro-
fessor of Humanities, Emeritus at Princeton 
University. She has received the National Book 
Critics Circle Award and the Pulitzer Prize. In 
1993 she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Lit-
erature. She lives in Rockland County, New 
Y ork, and Princeton, New Jersey.